ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS 

BOOK I 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTORY 

1. The purpose of the treatise. 2. Caritions to the 
Student. 3. Requisites in the Student 

(1) EVERY art, and every systematized enquiry, and 
in like manner every action and purpose, is regarded 
as aiming at some good : and so it has been well said 
that the good is that at which all things aim. 

Now there plainly is a difference in the Ends pro- 
posed : for in some cases it is the exercise of the 
faculties, in other cases a result over and above this 
exercise ; and where there is such a result in view, the 
end is naturally superior to the activity. Again, since 
actions and arts and sciences are many, the Ends 
likewise come to be many : of the healing art, the end 
is health ; of the shipbuilding art, a vessel ; of the 
military art, victory ; and of domestic management, 
wealth. 

And whatever of such actions, arts, or sciences 
range under some one faculty 1 (as under that of 
horsemanship the art of making bridles, and all that 
are connected with the manufacture of horse-furniture 
in general ; this itself again, and every action con- 
nected with war, under the military art ; and in the 
same way others under others) : in all such, the Ends 
of the master-arts are more choice-worthy than those 
ranging under them, because it is with a view to the 
former that the latter are pursued. 

(And in this comparison it makes no difference 
whether the exercise of the faculty is the End of 
the action, or something further beside it, as is the 

1 Better, ' art '.[ED.] 



2 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK i 

case in the arts and sciences we have been just speaking 
of.) 

Since then of all things which may be done there 
is some one End which we desire for its own sake, 
and with a view to which we desire everything else ; 
and since we do not choose in all instances with a 
further End in view (for then men would go on with- 
out limit, and so the desire would be unsatisfied and 
fruitless), this plainly must be the Chief Good, i.e. the 
best thing of all. 

Surely then, with reference to actual life and con- 
duct, the knowledge of this must have great weight ; 
like archers, with a mark in view, we shall be more 
likely to succeed in our aim : and if so, we ought to 
try to describe, in outline at least, what it is and of 
which of the sciences and arts it is the End. 

Now one would naturally suppose it to bo the End 
of that which is most commanding and most inclusive : 
and to this description, Politics 2 plainly answers : for 
this it is that determines which of the sciences are 
needed in the state, and which kind individuals are 
to learn, and what degree of proficiency is to be re- 
quired. Again ; we see also ranging under this the 
most highly esteemed arts, such as the art military, 
and that of domestic management, and Rhetoric. 
Well then, since this uses all the other practical sciences, 
and moreover lays down rules as to what men are to 
do, and from what to abstain, the End of this must 
include the Ends of the rest, and so must be The Good 
of Man. And grant that this is the same to the in- 
dividual and to the community, yet surely that of the 
latter is plainly greater and more perfect to discover 
and preserve : for to do this even for a single individ- 
ual were a matter for contentment ; but to do it for 

2 Aristotle included in ' Politics ' both the enquiry for 
the Good (i.e. Ethics), and the working of the law of the 
state (polis) to promote the Good. ' Ethics ' is thus a 
branch of ' Politics '. [Eo.j 



CHAP, i ETHICS 3 

a whole nation, and for communities generally, were 
more noble and godlike. 

(2) Such then are the objects proposed by our 
treatise, which is of a Political nature : and I con- 
ceive I shall . have spoken on them satisfactorily, if 
they be made as distinctly clear as the nature of the 
subject-matter will admit : for exactness must not be 
looked for in all discussions alike, any more than in 
all works of handicraft. Now the things which are 
noble and just, with which Politics is concerned, admit 
of variation and error to such a degree, that they are 
supposed by some to exist conventionally only, and 
not in the nature of things 3 : but then, again, the 
things which are allowed to be goods admit of a similar 
error, because harm comes to many from them : for 
before now some have perished through wealth, and 
others through valour. 

We must be content then, in speaking of such 
things and from such data, to set forth the truth 
roughly and in outline ; in other words, since we are 
speaking of general matter and from general data, to 
draw also conclusions merely general [i.e. general, not 
particular, and also probable, not certain. ED.]. And 
in the same spirit should each person receive what we 
say : for the man of culture will seek exactness so far 
in each subject as the nature of the thing admits, it being 
plainly much the same absurdity to allow a mathe- 
matician to persuade instead of proving, as to demand 
strict demonstrative reasoning of a rhetorician. 

(3) Now each man judges well what he knows, and 
of these things he is a good judge : on each particular 
matter then he is a good judge who has been instructed 
in it, and in a general way the man of general mental 
cultivation. 4 

3 For the history of this idea see J. Burnet in the Inter - 
national Journal of Ethics (April, 1897). [ED.] 

4 Matters of which a man is to judge either belong to 
some definite art or science, or they do not. In the former 
case he is the best judge who has thorough acquaintance 



4 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK i 

Hence the young man is not a fit student of Politics, 
for he has no experience in the actions of life, which 
constitute the subject-matter and the evidence of the 
discussion. And in the next place, since he is apt to 
follow the impulses of his passions, he will hear as 
though he heard not, and to no profit, the end in view 
being practice and not mere knowledge. 

And I draw no distinction between young in years, 
and youthful in temper and disposition : the dis- 
qualification to which I allude being no direct result 
of age but of living at the beck and call of passion, 
and following each object as it rises 6 . For to them 
that are such the knowledge comes to be unprofitable, 
as to ' the incontinent ' : but, to those who form their 
desires and act in accordance with reason, to have 
knowledge on these points must bo very profitable. 

Let thus much suffice by way of preface on these 
three points: the student, the spirit in which our 
observations should be received, and the object which 
we propose. 

CHAPTER II 

An enumeration of various opinions concerning the 
Chief Good a digression on the mode of reasoning to 
be adopted and the necessity of training for the per- 
ception of moral truths 

AND now, resuming the statement with which we 
commenced, since all knowledge and deliberate action 

with that art or science, in the latter, the man whose 
powers have been developed and matured by education. 
A lame horse one would show to a farrier, not to the best 
and wisest man of one's acquaintance : to the latter one 
would apply in a difficult case of conduct. 

[The specialist is here contrasted with the man of 
general knowledge. ED.]. 

8 In the last chapter of the third book of this treatise 
it is said of the fool, that his desire of pleasure is not only 
insatiable, but indiscriminate in its objects, Trarraxodev. 



CHAP, n ETHICS 6 

grasps at good of some kind or another, what good is 
that which we say Politics aims at ? or, in other words, 
what is the highest of all the goods which are the 
objects of action ? 

So far as name goes, there is a pretty general agree- 
ment : for HAPPINESS both the multitude and the 
cultured few 1 call it, and ' living well ' and ' doing 
well ' they conceive to be the same as ' being happy ' ; 
but about tho Nature of this Happiness men dispute, 
and the multitude do not in their account of it agree 
with the wise. For some say it is some one of those 
things which are palpable and apparent, as pleasure 
or wealth or honour ; in fact, some one thing, some 
another ; nay, the same man gives a different account 
of it at different times ; for when ill, he calls it health ; 
when poor, wealth : and conscious of their own ignor- 
ance, men admire those who talk grandly and above 
their comprehension. Some again have held it to be 
something by itself [i.e. an absolute good. ED.], other 
than and beside these many good things, which is in 
fact to all these the cause of their being good. 

Now to sift all the opinions would be perhaps rather 
a fruitless task ; so it shall suffice to sift those which 
are most generally current, or to appear have some 
reason in them. 

[ 2 And here we must not forget the difference 
between reasoning from principles, and reasoning to 
principles 3 : for with good cause Plato used to ask 
this question, and enquire whether the right road is 
from principles or to principles, just as in the race- 
course from the judges to the outer wall, or vice versa. 

Of course, we must begin with what is known. But 

1 The reference here is mainly to Plato and his school. 
[Ec.] 

2 I inclose this passage in brackets, as interrupting the 
thread of the discourse. 

3 i.e. between Inductive and Deductive argument. The 
former starts from single facts and makes general laws ; 
the latter deduces facts from general laws. [ED.] 



6 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK i 

this is of two kinds, what is 'known to us ' and what 
is ' known simply ' 4 : perhaps then as individuals 
we must begin with what is ' known to us '. Hence 
the necessity that he should have been well trained 
in habits, who is to study, with any tolerable chance 
of profit, the principles of nobleness and justice and 
Politics generally. For the fact is the starting-point, 
and if the fact is sufficiently clear to a man there will 
be no need in addition of the reason for the fact. And 
he that has been thus trained either has principles 
already, or can receive them easily : as for him who 
neither has nor can receive them, let him hear his 
sentence from Hesiod : 

' He is best of all who of himself conceiveth all things ; 
Good again is he too who can adopt a good suggestion ; 
But whoso neither of himself conceiveth nor hearing from 

another 
Layeth it to heart he is a useless man'. 5 ] 



CHAPTER III 

A short discussion of four theories as being most current, 
and a longer one of Plato's doctrine of Ideas 

BUT to return from this digression. 

Now of the Chief Good (or Happiness) men seem 
to form their notions from the different modes of life, 
as we might naturally expect : the many and most 
low conceive it to be pleasure, and hence they are 
content with the life of sensual enjoyment. For 
there are three lines of life which stand out promi- 
nently to view : that just mentioned, public life, 
and, thirdly, the life of contemplation. 

4 The distinction is between absolute, certain know- 
ledge (i.e. the knowledge which God has), and relative 
knowledge (i.e. human, of the senses). [Eo.] 

5 Hesiod, Works and Days, 291-5. [Eo.] 



CHAP, m ETHICS 7 

Now the many are plainly quite slavish, choosing 
a life like that of brute animals : yet they obtain 
some consideration, because many of the great share 
the taste of Sardanapalus. The refined and active 
again conceive it to be honour, for this may be said 
to be the aim of the public man : yet it is plainly too 
superficial for the object of our search, because it is 
thought to rest with those who pay rather than with 
him who receives it, whereas the Chief Good, we feel 
instinctively, must be something which is our own, 
and not easily to be taken from us. 

And besides, men seem to pursue honour, that they 
may believe themselves to be good : for instance, they 
seek to be honoured by the wise, and by those among 
whom they are known, and for virtue : clearly then, 
in the opinion at least of these men, virtue is higher 
than honour. In truth, we should perhaps more 
properly call this the aim of public life ; yet this 
itself is plainly not sufficiently final : for it is con- 
ceived possible, that a man possessed of virtue might 
sleep or be inactive all through his life, or, as a third 
case, suffer the greatest evils and misfortunes : and 
the man who should live thus no one would call happy, 
except for mere disputation's sake. 

And for these let thus much suffice, for they have 
been treated of at sufficient length in our everyday 
discussions. 1 

A third line of life is that of contemplation, con- 
cerning which we shall make our examination in the 
sequel. 2 

1 The Greek adjective Encyclius undoubtedly means 
that which belongs to the ' daily round, the common 
task'. Translate, therefore, (1) as above (Burnet), (2) 'the 
popular treatises' (Peters), (3) 'in our stock-debates'. 

[ED.] 

2 It is only quite at the close of the treatise that Aris- 
totle refers to this, and allows that contemplation con- 
stitutes the highest happiness because it is the exercise 
of the highest faculty in man : the reason of thus deferring 



8 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK I 

As for the lifo of money-making, it is one of con- 
straint, and wealth manifestly is not the good we are 
seeking, because it is for use, that is, as a means to 
something further : and hence one would rather con- 
ceive the forementioned ends to be the right ones, 
for men rest content with them for their own sakes. 
Yet, clearly, they are not the objects of our search 
either, though many words have been wasted on 
them. So much then for these. 

Again, the notion of one Universal Good (the same, 
that is, in all things) it is better perhaps we should 
examine, and discuss its difficulties, though such an 
enquiry is unpleasant, because they are friends of ours 
who have introduced these etdrj. 3 Still it will be 
admitted that it is better, nay our duty where the 
safety of the truth is concerned, to upset if need be 
even our own theories, specially as we are lovers of 
wisdom : for since both are dear to us, it is a sacred 
duty to prefer the truth. Now they who invented 
this doctrine of ei'S?? did not apply it to those things 
in which they spoke of priority and posteriority, and 
so they never made any Idta of numbers ; but good is 
predicated in the categories of Substance, Quality, and 
Relation ; now that which exists of itself, i.e. Sub- 
stance, is prior in the nature of things to that which 
is relative, because this latter is an off-shoot, as it 
were, an ' accident ' of that which is ; on their own 
principle then there cannot be a common tdta in the 
case of these. 

In the next place, since good is predicated in as 

the statement being that till the lower, that is the moral, 
nature has been reduced to perfect order, contemplation 
cannot have place ; though, had it been held out from the 
first, men would have been for making the experiment at 
once, without the trouble of self-discipline. 

:: The idea (idea) is the archetype, the e!5os (form) the 
concrete thing embodying the resemblance of it ; hence 
Aristotle alludes to the theory under both names, and 
this is the reason for retaining the Greek terms. 



CHAP, m ETHICS 9 

many ways as there are modes of existence [for it is 
predicated in the category of Substance, as God, 
Intellect and in that of Quality, as the Virtues 
and in that of Quantity, as the Mean and in that 
of Relation, as the Useful and in that of Time, as 
Opportunity and in that of Place, as Abode ; and 
other such like tilings], it manifestly cannot be some- 
thing common and universal and one in all : else it 
would not have been predicated in all the categories, 
but in one only. 

Thirdly, since those things which range under one 
idea are also under the cognizance of one science, 
there would have been, on their theory, only one 
science taking cognizance of all goods collectively : 
but in fact there are many even for those which range 
under one category : for instance, of Opportunity or 
Seasonableness (which I have before mentioned as 
being in the category of Time) the science is, in war, 
generalship ; in disease, medical science ; and of the 
Mean, (which I quoted before as being in the category 
of Quantity), in food, the medical science ; and in 
labour or exercise, the gymnastic science. A person 
might fairly doubt also what in the world they mean 
by very-this 4 that or the other, since, as they would 
themselves allow, the ' manhood ' is one and the same 
in the very-Man, and in any individual Man : for so 
far as the individual and the very-Man are both Man, 
they will not differ at all : and if so, then very-good 
and any particular good will not differ, in respect of 
goodness. Xor will it do to say, that the eternity 
of the very-good makes it to be more good ; for what 
has lasted white ever so long is no whiter than what 
lasts but for a day. 

No. The Pythagoreans do seem to give a more 
credible account of the matter, who place Unity among 

4 The technical translation here is ' the absolute ', 
' absolute ' man ; i.e. man in the abstract, as distinct 
from man in his relations to time, space, and circum- 
stances. [Eo.] 



10 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK i 

the goods in their double list of goods and bads : in 
which even Speusippus 5 seems to have followed them. 

But of these matters let us speak at some other 
time. Now there is plainly a loophole to object to 
what has been advanced, on the plea that the theory 
I have attacked is not by its advocates applied to all 
good : but those goods only are spoken of as being 
under one idea, which are pursued, and with which 
men rest content simply for their own sakes : whereas 
those things which have a tendency to produce or 
preserve them in any way, or to hinder their con- 
traries, are called good because of these other goods, 
and after another fashion. It is manifest then that 
good things may be so called in two senses, the one 
class for their own sakos, the other as means. 

Very well then, let us separate the independent 
goods from the instrumental, and see whether they 
are spoken of as under one idea. But the question 
next arises, what kind of goods are we to call inde- 
pendent ? All such as are pursued even when se- 
parated from other goods, as, for instance, being 
wise, seeing, and certain pleasures and honours ? (for 
these, though we do pursue them with some further 
end in view, one would still place among the inde- 
pendent goods) ; or does it come in fact to this, that 
we can call nothing independent good except the idea, 
and so the concrete of it will be nought G ? 

If, on the other hand, these are independent goods, 
then we shall require that the account of the goodness 
be the same clearly in all, just as of the whiteness 
in snow and white lead. But how stands the fact ? 
Why of honour and wisdom and pleasure the accounts 
are distinct and different in respect of their goodness. 
The Chief Good then is not something common, and 
after one idea. 

5 Plato's sister's son. 

6 i.e. the idea which has no concrete examples has no 
existence for us, e.g. whiteness in the abstract if there 
were no white things. [En.] 



CHAP, ra ETHICS 11 

But then, how does the name come to be common 
(for it is not seemingly a case of fortuitous equivo- 
cation). Are different individual things called good 
by virtue of being from one source, or all conducing 
to one end, or rather by way of analogy, for that 
intellect is to the soul as sight to the body, and so on ? 
However, perhaps we ought to leave these questions 
now, for an accurate investigation of them is more 
properly the business of a different philosophy. And 
likewise respecting the idea : for even if there is some 
one good predicated in common of all things that are 
good, or separable and capable of existing independ- 
ently, manifestly it cannot be the object of human 
action or attainable by man ; but we are in search 
now of something that is so. 7 

It may readily occur to any one, that it would be 
better to attain a knowledge of it with a view to such 
concrete goods as are attainable and practical, because, 
with this as a kind of model in our hands, we shall the 
better know what things are good for us individually, 
and when we know them, we shall attain them. 

Some plausibility, it is true, this argument possesses, 
but it is contradicted by the Sciences ; for all these, 
though aiming at some good, and seeking that which 
is deficient, yet pretermit the knowledge of the uni- 
versal good. Now it is absurd to suppose that all 
experts in all arts without exception should be igno- 
rant of so great a help as this would be, and not even 
look after it ; neither is it easy to see wherein a weaver 
or a carpenter will be profited in respect of his craft 
by knowing the very-good [absolute good ED.], or 
how a man will be the more apt to effect cures or to 
command an army for having seen the idea [pure 

7 This is the capital defect in Aristotle's eyes, who, 
being eminently practical, could not like a theory which 
not only did not necessarily lead to action, but had a 
tendency to discourage it by enabling unreal men to talk 
finely. If true, the theory is merely a way of stating facts, 
and leads to no action. 



12 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK i 

form] itself. For manifestly it is not health after 
this general and abstract fashion which is the subject 
of the physician's investigation, but the health of 
Man, or rather perhaps of this or that man ; for he 
has to heal individuals. Thus much on these points. 



CHAPTER IV 

Happiness is shown to possess two characteristics of the 
Chief Good, Inclusiveness of all other Ends, and being 
in itself Sufficient 

AND now let us revert to the Good of which we are 
in search : what can it be ? manifestly it is different 
in different actions and arts : for it is different in the 
healing art and in the art military, and similarly in 
the rest. What then is the good in each ? Is it not 
' that for the sake of which the other things are done ' ?, 
and this in the healing art is health, and in the art 
military victory, and in that of house-building a house, 
and in any other thing something else ; in short, in 
every action and purpose the End, because in all 
cases men do everything else with a view to this. 
So that if there is some one End of all tilings which are 
done, this must be the realized Good, or, if more than 
one, then these. 

Thus our discussion after some traversing about 
has come to the same point which we reached before. 
And this we must try yet more to clear up. 

Now since the ends are plainly many, and of these 
we choose some with a view to others (wealth, for 
instance, flutes, 1 and, in general, all instruments), 
it is clear that not all are final : but the Chief Good 
is manifestly something final ; and so, if there is some 
one only which is final, this must be the object of our 

1 Plato used the flute as typical of all instruments. 

[ED.] 



CHAP, iv ETHICS 13 

search : but if several, then the most final of them 
will be it. 

Now that which is an object of pursuit in itself we 
call more final than that which is so with a view to 
something else ; that again which is never an object 
of choice with a view to something else than those 
which are chosen both for themselves and with a view 
to this ulterior object : and so by the term ' absolutely 
final ' we denote that which is an object of choice always 
in itself, and never with a view to any other. 

And of this nature Happiness more than anything 
else is thought to be, for this we choose always for 
its own sake, and never with a view to anything 
further : whereas honour, pleasure, reason, in fact 
every excellence we choose partly for thoir own sakes, 
it is true (because we would choose each of these even 
if no result were to follow), but we choose them also 
with a view to happiness, conceiving that through 
their instrumentality we shall be happy : but no man 
chooses happiness with a view to them, nor in fact 
with a view to any other thing whatsoever. 

The same result 2 is seen to follow also from the 
notion of self-sufficiency, a quality thought to belong 
to the final good. Now by sufficient for Self, we mean 
not for a single individual living a solitary life, but 
for his parents also and children and wife, and, in 
general, friends and countrymen ; for man is by 
nature a social being. Of these, of course, some limit 
must be fixed : for if one extends it to parents and 
descendants and friends' friends, there is no end to 
it. This point, however, must be left for future 
investigation : for the present we define that to be 
self-sufficient ' which taken alone makes life choice- 
worthy, and to be in want of nothing '. Now we think 
that Happiness answers those requirements, and, 
further, that it is most choice-worthy of all things ; 

2 i.e. the identification of Happiness with the Chief 
Good. 



14 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK i 

not being reckoned with any other thing, 3 for if it 
were so reckoned, it is plain we must then allow it, 
with the addition of ever so small a good, to be more 
choice-worthy than it was before 4 : because what ia 
put to it becomes an addition of so much more good, 
and of goods the greater is ever the more choice- 
worthy. 

So then Happiness is manifestly something final 
and self-sufficient, being the end of all things which 
are and may be done. 



CHAPTER V 

Happiness defined. Repetition of cautions as to the 
method of proceeding. 

BUT, it may be, to call Happiness the Chief Good 
is a mere truism, and what is wanted is some clearer 
account of its real nature. Now this object may per- 
haps be attained, when we have discovered what is 
the true function of man ; for as in the case of flute- 
player, statuary, or craftsman of any kind, or, more 
generally, all who have any function or course of action, 
their Chief Good and Excellence is thought to reside 
in their function, so it would seem to be with man, 
if there is any function belonging to him. 

Are we to suppose, that while carpenter and cobbler 
have certain specific works and courses of action, Man 
as Man has none, but is left by Nature without a 
function ? or would not one rather hold, that as eye, 
hand, and foot, and generally each of his members, 
has manifestly some special function ; so too the whole 

8 i.e. as only ono among many. [Eo.] 

4 And then Happiness would at once be shown not to 
be the Chief Good. It is a contradiction in terms to 
speak of adding to the Chief Good (see Book x, ch. ii.) 



CHAP, v ETHICS 15 

Man, as distinct from all these, has some function of 
his own 1 ? 

What then can this be ? Not mere life, because 
that plainly is shared with him even by vegetables, 
and we want what is peculiar to him. We must separ- 
ate off then the life of mere nourishment and growth. 
Next will come the life of sensation : but this again 
manifestly is common to horses, oxen, and every 
animal There remains then what we may call the 
active life of the Eational Nature : and of this Nature 
there are two parts denominated Rational, the one 
as being obedient to Reason, the other as having and 
exerting it. Again, as this life is also spoken of in 
two ways, 2 we must take that which is in the way of 
actual working, because this is thought to be most 
properly entitled to the name. If then the function 
of Man is activity of the soul in accordance with 
reason, or at least not independently of reason, and 
we say that the function of any given artist, and of 
that artist good of his kind, are the same in kind, 
(as, for instance, of a harp-player and a good harp- 
player, and so on in every case, adding to the work 
eminence in the way of excellence ; I mean the work 
of a harp-player is to play the harp, and of a good 
harp-player to play it well) ; if, I say, this is so, and 
we assume the function of Man to be life of a certain 
kind, that is to say activity of the soul, and actions 
with reason, and of a good man to do these things 
well and nobly, and in fact everything is finished off 
well in the way of the excellence which peculiarly 
belongs to it : if all this is so, then the Good of Man 
comes to be ' a working of the Soul in the way of 
Excellence ' 3 , or, if Excellence admits of degrees, in 
the way of the best and most perfect Excellence. 

1 Compare Bishop Butler's account of 'Human nature as 
a System ', in the Preface to his Sermons. 

2 i.e. as working or as quiescent. 

3 Better, ' activity of the Soul in accordance with virtue 
(or excellence) '. [D.] 



16 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK i 

And we must add, in a complete life * ; for as it is 
not one swallow or one fine day that makes a spring, 
so it is not one day or a short time that makes a man 
blessed and happy. 

Let this then be taken for a rough sketch of the 
Chief Good : since it is probably the right way to give 
first the outline, and fill it in afterwards. And it would 
seem that any man may improve and connect what is 
good in the sketch, and that time is a good discoverer 
and co-operator in such matters. It is thus in fact 
that all improvements in the various arts have been 
brought about, for any man may fill up a deficiency. 

You must remember also what has been already 
stated, and not seek for exactness in all matters alike, 
but in each according to the subject-matter, and so 
far as properly belongs to the system. The carpenter 
and geometrician, for instance, enquire into the right 
angle in different fashion : the former so far as he 
wants it for his work, the latter enquires into its 
nature and properties, because he is concerned with 
the truth. 

So then should one do in other matters, that the 
incidental matters may not outweigh the fundamental. 

And again, you must not demand the reason in all 
things alike, 5 because in some it is sufficient that the 
fact has been clearly exhibited, which is the case with 
first principles ; and the fact is the first step, i.e. 
starting-point or principle. 

And of these first principles some are obtained by 
induction, some by intuition, 6 some by habituation, 

4 The translation hero conveys only a partial idea of 
the meaning. It is afterwards explained to include space 
of time and external appliances requisite for the full 
development of Man's energies. (Peters, ' a full term of 
years '). [En.] 

6 This principle is more fully stated, with illustrations, 
in the Topics, I, ch. ix. 

6 i.e. the axioms of Euclid. [Eo.] 



CHAP, vi ETHICS 17' 

others in other different ways. And we must try to 
trace up each in its own nature, and take pains to 
secure their being well denned, because they have 
great influence on what follows : it is thought, I mean, 
that the starting-point or principle is more than half 
the whole matter, and that many of the points of 
enquiry come simultaneously into view thereby. 



CHAPTER VI 

The definition of Happiness already attained tested by a 
comparison with the commonly received opinions on 
the subject 

WE must now enquire concerning Happiness, not 
only from our conclusion and the data on which our 
reasoning proceeds, but likewise from what is com- 
monly said about it : because with what is true all 
facts are in harmony, but with that which is false the 
true very soon jars. 

Now there is a common division of goods into three 
classes, one being called external, the other two those 
of the soul and body respectively. Those belonging 
to the soul we call most properly and specially good, 
and acts and exercises of the soul we regard as belong- 
ing to the soul. And so our account is a good one 
at least according to this opinion, which is of ancient 
date, and accepted by those who profess philosophy. 
Rightly too are certain actions and exercises said to 
be the end, for thus it is brought into the number of 
the goods of the soul instead of the external. Agreeing 
also with our definition is the common notion, that 
the happy man lives well and does well, for happiness 
has been stated by us to be a kind of living well and 
doing well. 

But further, the points required in Happiness are 
found in combination in our account of it. 

For some think it is virtue, others prudence, others 



18 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK i 

a kind of wisdom ; others that it is these, or else some 
one of them, in combination with pleasure, or at least 
not independently of it ; while others again take in 
external prosperity. 

Of these opinions, some rest on the authority of 
numbers or antiquity, others on that of few, and 
those men of note : and it is not likely that either 
of these classes should be wrong in all points ; both 
are probably right at least in some one, or even in 
most. 

Now with those who assert it to be Virtue (Excel- 
lence), or some kind of Virtue, our account agrees : 
for exercise of the faculties in the way of Excellence 
surely belongs to Excellence. 

And there is perhaps no unimportant difference 
between conceiving of the Chief Good as in mere 
possession or as in use in other words, as a mere 
habit or as the exercise of a faculty. For the state or 
habit may possibly exist in a subject without effect- 
ing any good, as, for instance, in him who is asleep, 
or in any other way inactive ; but this not so with 
the exercise, for it will of necessity act, and act well. 
And as at the Olympic games it is not the finest and 
strongest men who are crowned, but they who enter 
the lists, for out of these the prize-men are selected, 
so too in life, of the honourable and the good, it is 
they who act who rightly win the prizes. 

Their life too is in itself pleasant : for the feeling 
of pleasure is a mental sensation, and that is to each 
pleasant of which he is said to bo fond : a horse, for 
instance, to him who is fond of horses, and a sight to 
him who is fond of sights : and so in like manner 
just acts to him who is fond of justice, and more 
generally the things in accordance with virtue to him 
who is fond of virtue. Now in the case of the mul- 
titude of men the things which they individually 
esteem pleasant clash, because they are not such by 
nature, whereas to the lovers of nobleness those things 
are pleasant which are such by nature : but the actions 



CHAP, vi ETHICS 19 

in accordance with virtue are of this kind, so that 
they are pleasant both to the individuals and also in 
themselves. 

So then their life has no need of pleasure as a kind 
of appendage, but involves pleasure in itself. For, 
besides what I have just mentioned, a man is not a 
good man at all who feels no pleasure in noble actions, 1 
just as no one would call that man just who does not 
feel pleasure in acting justly, or liberal who does not 
in liberal actions, and similarly in the case of the 
other virtues which might be enumerated : and if this 
be so, then the actions in accordance with virtue must 
be in themselves pleasurable. Then again they are 
certainly good and noble, and each of these in the 
highest degree at least if we are to take as right the 
judgment of the good man, for he judges as we have 
said. 

Thus then Happiness is most excellent, most noble, 
and most pleasant, and these attributes are not sepa- 
rated as in the well-known Delian inscription : 

'Most noble is that which is most just, but best is health ; 
And naturally most pleasant is the obtaining one's desires.' 

For all these coexist in the best exercises of faculty : 
and we say that Happiness is these, or one of them, 
that is the best. 

2 Still it is quite plain that it does require the 

1 ' Goodness always implies the love of itself, an affec- 
tion to goodness.' (Bp. Butler, Sermons, xiii.) Aristotle 
describes pleasure in the Tenth Book of this treatise as 
the result of any faculty of perception meeting with the 
corresponding object, vicious pleasure being as truly 
pleasure as the most refined and exalted. If Goodness 
then implies the love of itself, the percipient will always 
have its object present, and pleasure continually result. 

2 In spite of theory, we know as a matter of fact that 
external circumstances are necessary to complete the idea 
of Happiness : not that Happiness is capable of addition, 



20 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK I 

addition of external goods, as we have said : because to 
the destitute it is impossible, or at all events not easy, 
to do noble actions : for friends, money, and political 
influence are in a manner instruments whereby many 
things are done. Some things there are, again, a 
deficiency in which mars blessedness ; good birth, 
for instance, or fine offspring, or even personal beauty : 
for he is not at all capable of Happiness who is very 
ugly, or is ill-born, or solitary and childless : and still 
less perhaps supposing him to have very bad children 
or friends, or to have lost good ones by death. As 
we have said already, the addition of prosperity of 
this kind does seem necessary to complete Happiness ; 
hence some identify good fortune, and others virtue, 
with Happiness. 



CHAPTER VII 

What is the source of Happiness 

AND hence too a question is raised, whether it is a 
thing that can be learned, or acquired by habituation 
or discipline of some other kind, or whether it comes 
in the way of divine dispensation, or even in the way 
of chance. 

Now to be sure, if anything else is a gift of the 
gods to men, it is probable that Happiness is a gift 
of theirs too, and specially because of all human goods 
it is the highest. But this, it may be, is a question 
belonging more properly to an investigation differ- 
ent from ours 1 : and it is quite clear, that on the 



but that when we assert it to be identical with virtuous 
action, we must understand that it is to have a fair field ; 
in fact, the other side of /Bios rAetos. 

1 It is remarkable how Aristotle here again shelves what 
he considers an unpractical question. If Happiness were 
really a direct gift from Heaven, independently of human 



CHAP. VTI ETHICS 21 

supposition of its not being sent from the gods direct, 
but coming to us by reason of virtue and learning of 
a certain kind, or discipline, it is yet one of the most 
godlike things ; because the prize and End of virtue 
is manifestly somewhat most excellent, nay, divine and 
blessed. 

It will also on this supposition be widely enjoyed, 
for it may through learning and diligence of a certain 
kind exist in all who have not been maimed 2 for 
virtue. 

And if it is better we should be happy thus than 
as a result of chance, this is in itself an argument 
that the case is so ; because those things which are 
in the way of nature, and in like manner of art, and 
of every cause, and specially the best cause, are by 
nature in the best way possible : to leave to chance 
what is greatest and most noble would strike a dis- 
cordant note. 

The question may be determined also by a reference 
to our definition of Happiness, that it is an activity 
of the soul in the way of excellence or virtue of a 
certain kind : and of the other goods, some we must 
have to begin with, and others are useful aids and 
instruments to happiness. 

These considerations will harmonize also with what 
we said at the commencement : for we assumed the 
End of Politics 3 to be most excellent : now this 
bestows most care on making the members of the 



conduct, all motive to self-discipline and moral improve- 
ment would vanish. Ho shows therefore that it is no 
depreciation of the value of Happiness to suppose it to 
come partly at least from ourselves, and he then goes on 
with other reasons why we should think with him. 

2 This term is important : what has been maimed was 
once perfect : he does not contemplate as possible the 
case of a man being born incapable of virtue, and so of 
happiness. 

a See ch. i., above. [Eo.] 



22 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK i 

community of a certain character ; good, that is, and 
apt to do what is honourable. 

With good reason then neither ox nor horse nor 
any other brute animal do we call happy, for none 
of them can partake in such activity : and for this 
same reason a child is not happy either, because by 
reason of his tender age he cannot yet perform such 
actions : if the term is applied, it is by way of antici- 
pation. 

For to constitute Happiness, there must be, as we 
have said, complete virtue and a life rounded off and 
complete [see chap, v above] : for many changes 
and chances of all kinds arise during a life, and he 
who is most prosperous may become involved in great 
misfortunes in his old age, as in the heroic poems the 
tale is told of Priam : but the man who has experienced 
such fortune and died in wretchedness, no man calls 
happy. 



CHAPTER VIII 

The real relation between Happiness and Fortune. 
Solon's dictum taken as a text 

ARE we then to call no man happy while he lives, 
and, as Solon would have us, look to the end ? And 
again, if we are to maintain this position, is a man 
then happy when he is dead ? Or is not this a com- 
plete absurdity, specially in us who say Happiness is 
activity of a certain kind ? 

If on the other hand we do not assert that the dead 
man is happy, and Solon does not mean this, but only 
that one would then be safe in pronouncing a man 
happy, as being thenceforward out of the reach of 
evils and misfortunes, this too admits of some dispute, 
since it is thought that the dead has somewhat both 
of good and evil (if, as we must allow, a man may 



CHAP, vm ETHICS 23 

have when alive though not aware of the circumstances), 
as honour and dishonour, and good and bad fortune 
of children and descendants generally. 

Nor is this view again without its difficulties : for, 
after a man has lived in blessedness to old age and 
died accordingly, many changes may befall him in 
right of his descendants ; some of them may be good 
and obtain positions in life accordant to their merits, 
others again quite the contrary. It is plain too that 
the descendants may at different intervals or grades 
stand in all manner of relations to the ancestors. 1 
Absurd indeed would be the position that even the 
dead man is to change about with them and become 
at one time happy and at another miserable. Absurd, 
however, it is on the other hand that the affairs of the 
descendants should in no degree and during no time 
affect the ancestors. 

But we must revert to the point first raised, 2 since 
the present question will perhaps be determined from 
that. 

If then we are to look to the end and then pro- 
nounce the man blessed, not as being so but as having 
been so at some previous time, surely it is absurd 
that when he i-s happy the truth is not to be asserted 
of him, because we are unwilling to pronounce the 
living happy by reason of their liability to changes, 
and because, whereas we have conceived of happiness 
as something stable and no way easily changeable, 

1 The supposed pair of ancestors [i.e. there will be 
sons, grandsons, great-grandsons, etc. ED.] 

2 Solon says ' Call no man happy till he is dead '. 
He must mean 

either. The man when dead 1.3 happy (a), 

or, The man when dead may be said to have been happy (b) 
If the former, does he mean positive happiness (a) 
or only freedom from unhappiness (3) 
We cannot allow (i), 
Men's opinions disallow (3), 
We revert now to the consideration of (b). 



24 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK i 

the fact is that good and bad fortune are constantly 
circling about the same people. For it is quite plain, 
that if we are to depend upon the fortunes of men, 
we shall often have to call the same man happy, and, 
a little while after, miserable, thus representing our 
happy man 

'Chameleon-like, and based on rottenness.' 

Is not this the solution ? that to make our sentence 
dependent on the changes of fortune, is no way right : 
for not in them stands the well, or the ill, but, though 
human life needs these as accessories (which we have 
allowed already), it is the exercise of the powers in 
accordance with virtue that determines Happiness, 
and the contrary the contrary. 

And, by the way, the question which has been 
here discussed, testifies incidentally to the truth of 
our account of Happiness. 3 For to nothing does a 
stability of human results attach so much as it does 
to the virtuous exercise of faculty, since these are 
held to be more abiding even than the sciences : and 
of these exercises the most precious are the most 
abiding, because the blessed live in them most and 
most continuously, which seems to be the reason why 
they are not forgotten. So then this stability which 
we seek will be in the happy man, and he will be such 
through life, since always, or as continuously as pos- 
sible, he will be doing and contemplating the things 
which are in the way of virtue : and the various chances 
of life he will boar most nobly, and at all times and 
in all ways harmoniously, since he is the truly good 

3 The difficulty was raised by the clashing of a notion 
commonly held, and a fact universally experienced. Most 
people conceive that Happiness should be abiding, every 
one knows that fortune is changeable. It is the notion 
which supports the definition, because we have therein 
based Happiness on the most abiding cause. 



CHAP, vra ETHICS 25 

man, or in the terms of our proverb ' a faultless 
cube '.* 

And whereas the incidents of chance are many, and 
differ in greatness and smallness, the small pieces of 
good or ifi fortune evidently do not affect the balance 
of life, but the great and numerous, if happening for 
good, will make life more blessed (for they add beauty, 
and the using of them comes to be noble and excellent), 
but if for ill, they bruise as it were and maim the 
blessedness : for they bring in positive pain, and 
hinder the exercise of faculties. But still, even in 
these, nobleness shines through when a man bears 
contentedly many and great mischances, not from 
insensibility to pain but because he is noble and high- 
spirited, 

And if, as we have said, actions determine the char- 
acter of the life, no one of the blessed can ever become 
wretched, because he will never do those things which 
are hateful and mean. For the man who is truly good 
and sensible bears all fortunes, we presume, becomingly, 
and always does what is noblest under the circum- 
stances, just as a good general employs to the best 
advantage the force he has with him ; or a good 
shoemaker makes the handsomest shoe he can out of 
the leather which has been given him ; and all other 
good craftsmen likewise. And if this be so, never can 
the happy man come to be wretched : though I do 
not mean to say he will be blessed should he fall into 
fortunes like those of Priam. 

Yet he is not shifting and easily changeable, for on 
the one hand from his happiness he will not be shaken 
easily nor by ordinary mischances, but, if at all, by 
those which are great and numerous ; and, on the 
other, after such mischances he cannot regain his 
happiness in a little time ; but, if at all, in a long and 
complete period, during which he has made himself 
master of great and noble things. 

4 [Peters has, ' Foursquare without a flaw'. En.] 



26 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK i 

Why then should we not call happy the man who 
exercises his faculties in accordance with perfect 
virtue, and is furnished with external goods sufficient 
for acting his part in life 5 : and this during no ordi- 
nary period but such as constitutes perfect life as we 
have been describing it ? Or, we must add, that not 
only is he to live so, but his death must be in keeping 
with such life, since the future ia dark to us, and 
Happiness we assume to be in every way an end and 
complete. And, if this be so, we shall call them 
among the living blessed who have and will have the 
things specified, but blessed as Men. 6 

On these points then let it suffice to have denned 
thus much. 

CHAPTER IX 

On the relation of the Dead to the Living 

Now that the fortunes of their descendants, and 
friends generally, contribute nothing towards forming 
the condition of the dead, is plainly a very heartless 
notion, and contrary to the current opinions. 

5 Hooker has (Eccles. Pol. v, Ixxvi., 5) a passage which 
seems to be an admirable paraphrase on this. 

' Again, that the measure of our outward prosperity be 
taken by proportion with that which every man's estate 
in this present life rcquireth. External abilities are 
instruments of action. It contenteth wise artificers to 
have their instruments proportionable to their work, 
rather fit for use than huge and goodly to please the eye. 
Seeing then the actions of a servant do not need that 
which may be necessary for men of calling and place in 
the world, neither men of inferior condition many things 
which greater personages can hardly want ; surely they 
are blessed in worldly respects who have wherewith to 
perform what their station and place asketh, though they 
have no more.' 

6 Always bearing in mind that man ' never continueth 
in one stay'. 



CHAP. EC ETHICS 27 

But since things which befall are many, and differ 
in all kinds of ways, and some touch more nearly, 
others less, to go into minute particular distinctions 
would evidently be a long and endless task : and so it 
may suffice to speak generally and in outline. 

If then, as of the misfortunes which happen to one's 
self, some have a certain weight and turn the balance 
of life, while others are, so to speak, lighter ; so it is 
likewise with those which befall all our friends alike. 
If further, whether they whom each suffering befalls be 
alive or dead makes much more difference than in a 
tragedy the presupposing or actual perpetration on 
the stage of the various crimes and horrors, we must 
take into our account this difference also, and still 
more perhaps the doubt concerning the dead whether 
they really partake of any good or evil. It seems to 
result from all these considerations, that if anything 
does pierce the veil and reach them, be the same good 
or bad, yet it is something trivial and small, either in 
itself or to them ; or at least of such a magnitude or 
such a kind as neither to make happy them that are 
not so otherwise, nor to deprive of their blessedness 
them that are. 1 

It is plain then that the good or ill fortunes of their 
friends do affect the dead somewhat : but in such 
kind and degree as neither to make the happy unhappy 
nor produce any other such effect. 

1 The meaning is this : personal fortunes, we have said, 
must be in certain weight and number to affect our own 
happiness : this will be true, of course, of those which are 
reflected on us from our friends : and these are the only 
ones to which the dead are supposed to be liable : add 
then the difference of sensibility which it is fair to presume, 
and there is a very small residuum of joy or sorrow. 



28 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK i 



CHAPTER X 

Whether Happiness is to be reckoned among things 
on or above the level of Praise 

HAVING determined these points, let us examine 
with respect to Happiness, whether it belongs to the 
class of things praiseworthy or rather precious ; for 
it evidently is not to be regarded as a potentiality. 1 

Now it is plain that everything which is a subject 
of praise is praised for being of a certain kind and 
bearing a certain relation to something else : for 
instance, the just and the valiant, and generally the 
good man, and virtue itself, we praise because of the 
actions and the results : and the strong man, and the 
quick runner, and so forth, we praise for being of 
a certain nature and bearing a certain relation to 
something good and excellent. (And this is illustrated 
by attempts to praise the gods ; for they are presented 
in a ludicrous aspect by being referred to our standard, 
and this results from the fact, that all praise does, as 
wo have said, imply reference to a standard.) Now 
if it is to such objects that praise belongs, it is evident 
that what is applicable to the best objects is not praise, 
but something higher and better : which is plain 
matter of fact, for not only do we call the gods blessed 
and happy, but of men also we pronounce those blessed 
who most nearly resemble the gods. And in like 
manner in respect of good things ; no man thinks of 
praising Happiness as he does Justice, but calls it 

1 This is meant for an exhaustive division of goods, 
which are either so in esse or in posse. 

If in esie, they are either above praise, or subjects of 
praise. Those in posse, here called faculties, are good 
only when rightly used. Thus Rhetoric is a faculty which 
may be used to promote justice or abused to support 
villainy. Money in like way. 



CHAP, xi ETHICS 29 

blessed, as being somewhat more godlike and more 
excellent. 

Eudoxus 2 is thought to have advanced a sound 
argument in support of the claim of pleasure to the 
highest prize : for the fact that, though it is one of 
the good things, it is not praised, he took for an in- 
dication of its superiority to those -which are subjects 
of praise : a superiority he attributed also to a god 
and the Chief Good, on the ground that they form 
the standard to which everything besides is referred. 
For praise applies to virtue, because it makes men 
apt to do what is noble ; but encomia to definite 
works of body or mind. 3 

However, it is perhaps more suitable to those who 
have made a special study of encomia to pursue this 
topic with exactness : it is enough for our purpose 
that from what has been said it is evident that Happi- 
ness belongs to the class of things precious and final. 
And it seems to be so also because of its being a starting- 
point ; which it is, in that with a view to it we all do 
everything else that is done. Xow the starting-point 
and cause of good things we assume to be something 
precious and divine. 



CHAPTER XI 

An analysis of the Soul of Man, and a division of Excel- 
lence accordingly 

MOREOVER, since Happiness is an activity of the 
soul in the way of perfect Excellence, 1 we must 

- Eudoxus, a philosopher holding the doctrine after- 
wards adopted by Epicurus respecting pleasure, but (as 
Aristotle testifies in the Tenth Book) of irreproachable 
character. 

^ See the Rhetoric, Book i. ch. ix. 

1 Perhaps Virtue is preferable to Excellence throughout 
this argument. [Eo.] 



30 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK i 

enquire concerning Excellence : for so probably shall 
we have a clearer view concerning Happiness. Again, 
he who is really a statesman is generally thought to 
have spent most pains on this, for he wishes to make 
the citizens good and obedient to the laws. (For 
examples of this class we have the lawgivers of the 
Cretans and Lacedaemonians and whatever other such 
there have been). But if this investigation belongs 
properly to Politics [i.e. the whole science of govern- 
ment. ED.], then clearly the enquiry will be in 
accordance with our original design. 

Well, we are to enquire concerning Excellence, 
i.e. Human Excellence of course, because it was the 
Chief Good of Man and the Happiness of Man that 
we were enquiring of just now. 

By Human Excellence we mean not that of man's 
body but that of his Soul ; for we call Happiness an 
activity of the Soul. 

And if this is so, it is plain that some knowledge 
of the nature of the Soul is necessary for the states- 
man, just as for the oculist a knowledge of the whole 
body, and the more so in proportion as Politics is more 
precious and higher than the healing art : and in fact 
physicians of the higher class do busy themselves much 
with the knowledge of the body. 

So then the statesman is to consider the nature of 
the Soul : but he must do so with these objects in 
view, and so far only as may suffice for the objects of 
his special enquiry : for to carry his speculations to 
a greater exactness is perhaps a task more laborious 
than falls within his province. 

In fact, the few statements made on the subject 
in my popular treatises are quite enough, and accord- 
ingly we will adopt them here : as, that the Soul 
consists of two parts, the Irrational and the Rational. 
Whether these are actually divided, as are the parts 
of the body, and everything that is capable of division ; 
or are two in thought only, being by nature insepa- 
rable, as are convex and concave circumferences, 



CHAP, xi ETHICS 31 

matters not in respect of our present purpose. And 
of the Irrational, the one part seems common to other 
objects, and in fact to plants ; I mean the cause of 
nourishment and growth (for such a faculty of the 
Soul one would assume to exist in all things that 
receive nourishment, even in embryos, and this the 
same as in the full-grown creatures ; for this is more 
likely than that it should be a different one). 

Now the Excellence of this manifestly is not peculiar 
to the human species but common to others : for 
this part and this faculty is thought to work most 
in time of sleep, and the good and bad man are least 
distinguishable while asleep ; whence it is a common 
saying that during one half of life there is no differ- 
ence between the happy and the wretched ; and this 
accords with our anticipations, for sleep is an inactivity 
of the soul, in so far as it is denominated good or bad, 
except that in some wise some of its movements find 
their way through the veil and so the good come 
to have better dreams than ordinary men. But 
enough of this : we may forego any further mention 
of the nutritive part, since it is not naturally capable 
of the Excellence which is peculiarly human. 

And there seems to be another Irrational Nature 
of the Soul, which yet in a way partakes of Reason. 
For in the man who controls his appetites, and in him 
who resolves to do so and fails, 2 we praise the Reason 
or Rational part of the Soul, because it exhorts aright 
and to the best course : but clearly there is in them, 
beside the Reason, some other natural principle which 
fights with and strains against the Reason. For in 
plain terms, just as paralysed limbs of the body when 
their owners would move them to the right are borne 
aside in a contrary direction to the left, so is it in the 
case of the Soul, for the incontinent man's impulses 
are to contrary points : the difference is that in the 
case of the body we do see what is borne aside but in 

2 i.e. the continent and tlie incontinent man. [Eo.] 



32 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK i 

the case of the soul we do not. But, it may be, not 
the less 3 on that account are we to suppose that 
there is in the Soul also somewhat besides the Reason, 
which is opposed to this and goes against it ; as to 
how it is different, that is irrelevant. 

But of Reason this too does evidently partake, as 
we have said : for instance, in the continent man 
it obeys Reason : and perhaps in the temperate man, 4 
or the brave man, it is yet more obedient ; in them it 
agrees entirely with the Reason. 

So then the Irrational is plainly twofold : the one 
part, the merely vegetative, has no share of Reason, 
but that of desire, or appetition generally, does par- 
take of it in a sense, in so far as it is obedient to it 
and capable of submitting to its rule. So too in com- 
mon phrase we speak of rational obedience to a father 
or friends, but this in a different sense from that in 
which we say we have rational apprehension of mathe- 
matics. 

Now that the Irrational is in some way persuaded 
by the Reason, admonition and every act of rebuke 
and exhortation indicate. If then we are to say that 
this also has Reason, then the Rational, as well as 
the Irrational, will bo twofold, the one supremely 
and in itself, the other paying it a kind of filial regard. 

Virtue then is divided in accordance with this 

3 The unseen is at least as real as the seen. 

4 The terms are borrowed from the Seventh Book, and 
are here used in their strict philosophical meaning. The 
eyk-pa.Tr,s is he who has bad or unruly appetites, but whose 
reason is strong enough to keep them under. The dxparris 
is he whose appetites constantly prevail over his reason 
and previous good resolutions. 

By the law of habits the former is constantly approxi- 
mating to a state in which the appetites are wholly quelled. 
This state is called auxppoa-vvri, and the man in it uwfypuv. 
By the same law, the remonstrances of reason in the latter 
grow fainter and fainter till they are silenced for ever. 
This state is called a.K.o\o.aia., and the mau in it d/coAaoros. 



CHAP, xi ETHICS 33 

difference : we make two classes, calling the one 
Intellectual, and the other Moral ; wisdom, intelligence, 
and practical wisdom Intellectual : liberality, and 
perfected self-mastery Moral : in speaking of a man's 
Moral character, we do not say he is a wise or in- 
telligent but a gentle man, or one of perfected self- 
mastery. But we praise the wise man in right of his 
trained habit of mind ; and of these such as are praise- 
worthy we call Excellences [Virtues. ED.] 



BOOK II 

CHAPTER I 

That Moral Virtue is produced by a succession of 
right actions 

WELL, human Excellence is of two kinds, Intel- 
lectual and Moral J : now the Intellectual springs 
originally, and is increased subsequently, from teach- 
ing (for the most part that is 2 ), and needs therefore 
experience and time ; whereas the Moral comes from 
custom [i.e. ethos. ED.], and so the Greek term denot- 
ing it is but a slight deflection from the term denoting 
custom in that language [i.e. ethics. ED.]. 

From this fact it is plain that not one of the Moral 
Virtues comes to be in us merely by nature : because 
of such things as exist by nature, none can be changed 
by custom. A stone, for instance, by nature gravitating 
downwards, could never by custom be brought to 
ascend, not even if one were to try and accustom it 
by throwing it up ten thousand times ; nor could fire 
again be brought to descend, nor in fact could any 
thing whose nature is in one way be brought by custom 
to be in another. The Virtues then come to be in us 
neither by nature, nor in despite of nature, but we 
are furnished by nature with a capacity for receiving 
them, and are perfected in them through custom. 

Again, in whatever cases we get things by nature, 
we get the power first and perform the acts afterwards. 
An illustration of this is afforded by the case of our 
bodily senses, for it was not from having often seen 
or heard that we got these senses, but just the reverse : 
we had them and so exercised them, but did not have 
them because we had exercised them. But the Virtues 

1 Which we call simply virtue. 

2 For nature must of course supply the capacity. 



CHAP, i ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS 35 

we get by doing the acts, which, again, is the case of 
other things, as the arts for instance ; for what we 
have to make only when we have learned how, these 
we learn how to make by making : men come to be 
builders, for instance, by building ; harp-players, by 
playing on the harp : exactly so, by doing just actions 
we come to be just ; by doing the actions of temper- 
ance we come to be temperate ; and by doing brave 
actions brave. 

And to the truth of this, testimony is borne by 
what takes place in communities ; because the law- 
givers make the individual members good men by 
training, and this is the intention, certainly, of every 
lawgiver, and all who do not effect it well fail of their 
intent ; and herein consists the difference between a 
good Constitution and a bad. 

Again, every Virtue is either produced or destroyed, 
from and by the very same circumstances : art too in 
like manner ; I mean it is by playing the harp that 
both the good and the bad harp-players are formed : 
and similarly builders and all the rest ; by building 
well men will become good builders ; by doing it 
badly bad ones : in fact, if this had not been so, there 
would have been no need of instructors, but all men 
would have been at once good or bad in their several 
arts without them. 

So too then is it with the Virtues : for by acting 
in the various relations in which we are thrown with 
our fellow men, we come to be, some just, some un- 
just : and by acting in dangerous positions and being 
habituated to feel fear or confidence, we come to be, 
some brave, others cowards. 

Similarly is it also with respect to the occasions of 
lust and anger : for some men come to be temperate 
and gentle, others profligate and passionate; the one 
class by behaving in one way under them, the other by 
behaving in another. In short, habits of any kind are 
produced from acts of the same kind : and so what 
we have to do is to give a certain character to these 



36 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK n 

particular acts, because the habits formed correspond 
to the differences of these. 

So then, whether we are accustomed this way or 
that straight from childhood, makes not a small but 
an important difference, or rather I would say it 
makes all the difference. 



CHAPTER II 

The Standard and Rule of right action. How the perfect 
formation of habits may be tested. Virtue is shown to 
have pleasure and pain for its object-matter 

SINCE then the object of the present treatise is not 
mere speculation, as it is of the others (for we are 
enquiring not merely that we may know what virtue 
is but that we may become virtuous, else it would 
have been useless), we must consider as to the par- 
ticular actions how we are to do them, because, as we 
have just said, the habits that shall be formed depend 
on these. 

Now, that we are to act in accordance with Right 
Reason is a general maxim, and may for the present 
be taken for granted : we will speak of it hereafter, 
and say both what Right Reason is, and what are its 
relations to the other virtues. 1 

But let this point be first thoroughly understood 
between us, that all which can be said on moral action 
must be said in outline, as it were, and not with mathe- 
matical exactness : for as we remarked at the com- 
mencement, such reasoning only must be required as 
the nature of the subject-matter admits of, and matters 
of moral action and expediency have no fixedness 
any more than matters of health. And if the subject 
in its general maxims is such, still less in its application 

1 This is done in the Sixth Book. [Burnet translates 
' Right Hide.'' En.] 



CHAP, it ETHICS 37 

to particular cases is exactness attainable '-' : because 
these fall not under any science or accepted system of 
rules, but it must be left in each instance to the in- 
dividual agents to look to the exigencies of the particular 
case, as it is in the art of healing, or that of navigating 
a ship. Still, though the subject is confessedly such, 
we must try and do what we can for it. 

First then this must be noted, that it is the nature 
of such things to be spoiled by defect and excess ; as 
we see in the case of health and strength (since for 
the illustration of things which cannot be seen we 
must use those that can), for excessive training impairs 
the strength as well as deficient : meat and drink, in 
like manner, in too great or too small quantities, impair 
the health : while in due proportion they cause, in- 
crease, and preserve it. 

Thus it is therefore with the habits of perfected 
Temperance and Courage and the rest of the Virtues: 
for the man who flies from and fears all things, and 
never stands up against anything, comes to be a 
coward ; and he who fears nothing, but goes at every- 
thing, comes to be rash. In like manner too, he that 
tastes of every pleasure and abstains from none comes 
to be profligate ; while he who avoids all, as do the 
dull and clownish, comes as it were to lose his faculties 
of perception : that is to say, Temperance and 
Courage are spoiled by excess and defect, but by 
moderation are preserved. 

Furthermore, not only do the origination, growth, 
and marring of the habits come from and by the 
same circumstances, but also the acts, after the habits 
are formed, will be exercised on the same : for so it is 
also with those other things which are more directly 
matters of sight, strength for instance : for this comes 

2 It is, in truth, in the application of rules to particular 
details of practice that our moral Responsibility chiefly 
lies. See Bishop Butler's ' Sermon on the Character of 
Balaam', and that on 'Self-Deceit'. 



38 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK n 

by taking plenty of food and doing plenty of work, 
and the man who has attained strength is best able to 
do these. And so it is with the Virtues, for not only 
do we by abstaining from pleasures come to be temper- 
ate, but when we have come to be so we can best 
abstain from them. Similarly too with Courage, for 
it is by accustoming ourselves to despise objects of 
fear and stand up against them that we come to be 
brave ; and after we have come to be so we shall be 
best able to face such objects. 

And for a test of the formation of the habits we 
must take the pleasure or pain which succeeds the 
acts ; for he is perfected in Temperance who not only 
abstains from the bodily pleasures but is glad to do 
so ; whereas he who abstains but is sorry to do it is 
profligate : he again is brave who stands up against 
danger, either with positive pleasure or at least with- 
out any pain ; whereas he who does it with pain is 
not brave. 3 

For Moral Virtue has for its object-matter pleasures 
and pains, because by reason of pleasure we do what 
is bad, and by reason of pain decline doing what is 
right (for which cause, as Plato observes, men should 
be trained from their childhood to receive pleasure 
and pain from proper objects, for this is true educa- 
tion). Again, the fact that Virtues have to do with 
actions and passions, and on every passion and every 
action pleasure and pain follow, is another proof that 
Virtue has for its object-matter pleasure and pain. 
The same is shown also by the fact that punishments 
are effected through the instrumentality of these 
because they are of the nature of remedies, and it is 
the nature of remedies to be the contraries of the ills 
they cure. Again, to quote what we said before, every 
habit of the Soul by its very nature has relation to, 

;i All that is meant here is, that no habit of courage 
or temperance can be said to bo matured, until pain 
altogether vanishes. 



CHAP. H ETHICS 39 

and exerts itself upon, things of the same kind as those 
by which it is naturally deteriorated or improved. 
Now habits come to be vicious by reason of pleasures 
and pains, that is, by men pursuing or avoiding re- 
spectively, either such as they ought not, or at wrong 
times, or in wrong manner, and so forth ; for which 
reason, by the way, some people define the Virtues 
as certain states of impassibility and utter quietude, 4 
but they are wrong because they speak without modifi- 
cation, instead of adding ' as they ought ', ' as they 
ought not ', and ' when ', and so on. Virtue then is 
that habit which is such, in relation to pleasures and 
pains, as to effect the best results, and Vice the contrary. 
The following considerations also may serve to set 
this in a clear light. There are principally three things 
moving us to choice and three to avoidance, the 
honourable, the expedient, the pleasant ; and their 
three contraries, the dishonourable, the hurtful, and 
the painful : now the good man is apt to go right, and 
the bad man wrong, with respect to all these of course, 

4 Virtue consists in the due regulation of all the parts 
of our nature : our passions are a real part of that nature, 
and as such have their proper office ; it is an error then 
to aim at their extirpation. It is true that in a perfect 
moral state emotion will be rare, but then this will have 
been gained by regular process, being the legitimate result 
of the law that ' passive impressions weaken as active 
habits are strengthened, by repetition '. If musical 
instruments are making discord, I may silence or I may 
bring them into harmony : in either case I get rid of 
discord, but in the latter I have the positive enjoyment 
of music. The Stoics would have the passions rooted 
out, Aristotle would have them cultivated : to use an 
apt figure (whose I know not), They would pluck the 
blossom off at once ; he would leave it to fall in due 
course when the fruit was formed. Of them we might 
truly say, Solitudinem faciunt, pace.m appellant. See on 
this point Bp. Butler's fifth Sermon, and sect, ii of tho 
chapter on ' Moral Discipline ' in the first part of his Analogy. 



40 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK n 

but most specially with respect to pleasure : because 
not only is this common to him with all animals but 
also it is a concomitant of all those things which move 
to choice, since both the honourable and the expedient 
give an impression of pleasure. 

Again, it grows up with us all from infancy, and 
so it is a hard matter to remove from ourselves this 
feeling, engrained as it is into our very life. 

Again, we adopt pleasure and pain (some of us 
more, and some less) as the measure even of actions. 
For this cause then our whole business must be with 
them, since to receive right or wrong impressions of 
pleasure and pain is a thing of no little importance 
in respect of actions. Once more ; it is harder, as 
Heraclitus says, to fight against pleasure than against 
anger : now it is about that which is more than com- 
monly difficult that art comes into being, and virtue 
too, because in that which is difficult the good is of a 
higher order : and so for this reason too both virtue 
and Politics in the wide sense [p. 2, note] must wholly 
busy themselves respecting pleasures and pains, be- 
cause he that uses those well will be good, he that does 
so ill will be bad. 

Let us then be understood to have stated, that 
Virtue has for its object-matter pleasures and pains, 
and that it is either increased or marred by the same 
circumstances (differently used) by which it is originally 
generated, and that it exerts itself on the same circum- 
stances out of which it was generated. 



CHAPTER III 

An objection to the foregoing account of the formation 
of Moral Virtue, with an answer 

Now I can conceive a person perplexed as to the 
meaning of our statement, that men must do just 



CHAP, in ETHICS 41 

actions to become just, and those of self-mastery 1 to 
acquire the habit of self-mastery ; ' for ', he would 
say, ' if men are doing the actions they have the 
respective virtues already, just as men are gram- 
marians or musicians when they do the actions of 
either art.' May we not reply by saying that it is 
not so even in the case of the arts referred to. A man 
may produce something grammatical either by chance 
or the suggestion of another ; but then only will he 
be a grammarian when he not only produces some- 
thing grammatical but does so grammarian-wise, i.e. 
in virtue of the grammatical knowledge he himself 
possesses. 

But, further, the cases of the arts and the virtues are 
not parallel Those things which are produced by 
the arts have their excellence in themselves, and it is 
sufficient, therefore, that these when produced should be 
of a certain kind : but those which are produced in 
the way of the virtues, are, strictly speaking, actions 
of a certain kind (say of Justice or perfected Self- 
Mastery) not merely if in themselves they are of a 
certain kind but if also the Agent does them being 
himself in a certain state. He must know what he 
is doing ; his action must be deliberate and for no 
ulterior object ; the motive must be the outcome of 
a fixed and steady habit of mind. Now to constitute 
possession of the arts these requisites are not reckoned 
in, excepting the one point of knowledge : whereas for 
possession of the virtues knowledge avails little or 
nothing, but the other requisites avail not a little, 
but, in fact, are all in all, and these requisites as a 
matter of fact do come from oftentimes doing the 
actions of Justice and perfected Self-Mastery. 1 

The facts, 2 it is true, are called by the names of 

1 The eenerallv-accepted translation is Temperance. 

[ED.] 

J I have adopted this word from our old writers, because 
our word act is so commonly interchanged with action. 



42 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK 11 

those habits when they are such as the just or perfectly 
self-mastering man would do : but he is not in pos- 
session of the virtues who merely does these facts, but 
he who also so does them as the just and temperate 
do them. 

We are right then in saying, that these virtues are 
formed in a man by his doing the actions ; but no 
one, if he should leave them undone, would be even 
in the way to become a good man. Yet people in 
general do not perform these actions, but taking 
refuge in talk they natter themselves they are philo- 
sophizing, and that they will so be good men : acting 
in truth very like those sick people who listen to the 
doctor with great attention but do nothing that he 
tells them. Just as these then cannot be well bodily 
under such a course of treatment, so neither can 
those be mentally by such philosophizing. 



CHAPTER IV 

What is the Genus of Virtue 

NEXT, we must examine what Virtue is. 1 Well, 
since the conditions of the mind are, in all, of three 

npd^Ls (action) properly denotes the whole process from 
the conception to the performance. Hpdyfj.i (fact) only 
the result. The latter may be right when the former is 
wrong : if, for example, a murderer were killed by his 
accomplices. Again, the 7rpats may be good though the 
Trpa.yfj.a be wrong, as if a man under erroneous impressions 
does what would have been right if his impressions had 
been true (subject of course to the question how far he 
is guiltless of his original error), but in this case we could 
not call the 7rpats right. No repetition of Trpdy^ara. goes 
to form a habit. See Bp. Butler on ' The Theory of Habits ' 
in the chapter on ' Moral Discipline ', quoted above, sect. ii. 
' And in like manner as habits belonging to the body ' &c. 
1 Being about to give a strict logical definition of Virtue, 
Aristotle ascertains lirst what is its genus ri e<mj'. 



CHAP, iv ETHICS 43 

kinds, Emotions, Capacities, Habits, 2 Virtue of course 
must belong to one of the three classes. 

By Emotions, I mean such as lust, anger, fear, 
confidence, envy, joy, friendship, hatred, longing, 
emulation, compassion, in short all such as are fol- 
lowed by pleasure or pain ; by Capacities, those in 
right of which we are said to be capable of these 
feelings (as by virtue of which we are able to be 
made angry, or grieved, or to compassionate) ; by 
Habits or Dispositions, those in right of which we are 
in a certain relation good or bad to the aforementioned 
feelings ; to anger, for instance, we are in a wrong 
relation if in our anger we are too violent or too slack, 
but if we are in the happy medium we are in a right 
relation to the feeling. And so on of the rest. 

Now Emotions neither the virtues nor the vices are, 
because in right of the Emotions we are not deno- 
minated either good or bad, but in right of the virtues 
and vices we are. 

Again, in right of the Emotions we are neither 
praised nor blamed 3 (for a man is not commended 
for being afraid or being angry, nor blamed for being 
argry in itself but for being so in a particular way), 
but in right of the virtues and vices we are. 

Again, both anger and fear we feel without deliberate 
choice, whereas the virtues imply deliberate choice, or 
at least are certainly not independent of it. 

Moreover, in right of the Emotions we are said to 
be moved, but in right of the virtues and vices not 
to be moved, but disposed, in a certain way. 

And for these same reasons they are not Capacities, 4 

-i.e. formed habits, or crystallized tendencies to act in 
given ways under given conditions. [D.] 

a That is, not for merely having them, because we did 
not make ourselves. 

See Bp. Butler's account of our nature as containing 
' particular propensions ', in sect, iv of the chapter on 
' Moral Discipline', and in the Preface to the Sermons. 

'i.e. Faculties or Powers. [ 



44 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK n 

for we are not called good or bad merely because we 
are able to feel, nor are we praised or blamed. 

And again, Capacities we have by nature, but we 
do not come to be good or bad by nature, as we have 
said before. 

Since then the Virtues are neither Emotions nor 
Capacities, it remains that they must be Habits. 



CHAPTER V 

What is the Differentia of Virtue 

THUS what the genus of Virtue is has been shown ; 
but we must not merely speak of it thus, that it is a 
Habit, but say also what kind of a Habit it is. 

We may say that all excellence l makes that where- 
of it is the excellence both to be itself in a good state 
and to perform its work well. The excellence of the 
eye, for instance, makes both the eye good and its 
work also : for by the excellence of the eye wo see well. 
So too the excellence of the horse makes a horse good, 
i.e. good in speed, and in carrying his rider, and stand- 
ing up against the enemy. If then this is universally 
the case, the excellence of man, i.e. Virtue, must be 
the habit (i.e. trained faculty) whereby Man comes to 
be good and whereby he will perform well his proper 
function. Now how this shall be it is true we have 
said already, but still perhaps it may throw light on 
the subject to see what is its characteristic nature. 

In all quantity then, whether continuous or dis- 
crete, 2 one may take the greater part, the less, or 

1 Excellence and virtue are here used indiscriminately. 
The latter (an extended sense being understood) is prefer- 
able. [En.] 

M This refers to the division of quantity (ir6uov) in the 
Categories. Those Quantities are called by Aristotle 
Continuous, whoso parts have position relatively to one 



CHAP, v ETHICS 45 

the exactly equal, and that either with reference to 
the thing itself, or relatively to us : and the half is a 
mean between excess and defect. Now by the mean 
of the thing, i.e. absolute mean, I denote that which 
is equidistant from either extreme (which of course 
is one and the same to all) ; and by the relative mean 
that which is neither too much nor too little for the 
particular individual. This of course is not one nor 
the same to all. For instance, suppose ten is too 
much and two too little, people take six for the abso- 
lute mean ; because it exceeds the smaller sum by 
exactly as much as it is itself exceeded by the larger, 
and this mean is according to arithmetical proportion. 3 

But the mean relatively to ourselves must not be 
so found ; for it does not follow, supposing ten minae 4 
is too large a quantity to eat and two too small, tha 
the trainer will order his man six ; because for th 
person who is to take it this also may be too much 
or too little : for Milo it would be too little, but for a 
man just commencing his athletic exercises too much : 
similarly too of the exercises themselves, as running 
or wrestling. 

So then it seems the expert avoids excess and defect, 
but seeks for and chooses the mean, not the absolute 
but the relative. 

Now if all skill thus accomplishes well its work by 
keeping an eye on the mean, and bringing the works 
to this point (whence it is common enough to say of 
such works as are in a good state, ' one cannot add 

another, as a line, surface, or solid ; those discrete, whose 
parts have no such relation, as numbers themselves, or 
any string of words grammatically unconnected. 

a Numbers are in arithmetical proportion, (more usually 
called progression), when they increase or decrease by a 
common difference : thus, 2, 6, 10, are so, because 2 + 4 6, 
6 + 4 =. 10, or vice versa, 10 - 4 ^ 6, 6 - 4 = 2. 

4 If the mina be taken at 15 oz. avoirdupois, (Diet, of 
Greek and Roman Antiquities, article ' Talentum'), we must 
be sadly degenerate in our gastric capacity. 



46 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK n 

to or take aught from them', under the notion of 
excess or defect destroying goodness but the mean 
state preserving it), and good craftsmen, as we say, 
work with their eye on this, and if excellence, like 
nature, is more exact and better than any art in the 
world, it also must aim at the mean. 

It is moral excellence, i.e. Virtue, of course which 
I mean, because this it is which is concerned with 
feelings and actions, and in these there can be excess 
and defect and the mean : it is possible, for instance 
to feel the emotions of fear, confidence, lust, anger, 
compassion, and pleasure and pain generally, too 
much or too little, and in either case wrongly ; but 
to feel them when we ought, on what occasions, to- 
wards whom, why, and as, we should do, is the mean, 
or in other words the best state, and this is the criterion 
of Virtue. In like manner too with respect to the 
actions, there may be excess and defect and the mean. 

Now Virtue is concerned with feelings and actions, 
in which the excess is wrong and the defect is blamed 
but the mean is praised and goes right : and both 
these circumstances belong to Virtue. Virtue then is 
a short of ' moderateness ' since it naturally aims at 
the mean. 

Again, one may go wrong in many different ways 
(because, as the Pythagoreans expressed it, evil is 
of the class of the infinite, good of the finite), but 
right only in one ; and so the former is easy, the 
latter difficult easy to miss the mark, but hard 
to hit it : and for these reasons, therefore, both 
excess and defect belong to Vice, and the mean state 
to Virtue ; for, as the poet has it, 

' Men may be bad in many ways, 
But good in one alone.' 



CHAP, vi ETHICS 47 

CHAPTER VI 

Notes on the Definition of Virtue thus obtained 

VIRTUE, therefore, is a formed condition (or habit) 
of the Will (or choice), based on the avoidance of excess 
and defect (not absolutely, but) in relation to the 
persons involved, and on reason (i.e. as defined by the 
wise or prudent man). 

It is a middle state between too faulty ones, in 
the way of excess on one side and of defect on the 
other : and it is so moreover, because the faulty 
states on one side fall short of, and those on the other 
exceed, what is right, both in the case of the feelings 
and the actions ; but Virtue finds, and when found 
adopts, the mean. 

And so, viewing it in respect of its essence and 
definition, Virtue is a mean state ; but in reference 
to the chief good and to excellence it is the highest 
state possible. 

But it must not be supposed that every action or 
every feeling is capable of subsisting in this mean 
state, because some there are which are so named 
as immediately to convey the notion of badness, as 
malevolence, shamelessness, envy ; or, to instance in 
actions, adultery, theft, homicide ; for all these and 
suchlike are blamed because they are in themselves 
bad, not the having too much or too little of them. 

In these then you never can go right, but must 
always be wrong : nor in such does the right or wrong 
depend on the selection of a proper person, time, or 
manner, (take adultery, for instance), but simply 
doing any one soever of those things is being wrong. 

You might as well require that there should be 
determined a mean state, an excess and a defect in 
respect of acting unjustly, being cowardly, or giving 
up all control of the passions : for at this rate there 
will be of excess and defect a mean state ; of excess, 
excess ; and of defect, defect. 



48 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK n 

But just as of temperance and courage there is 
no excess and defect, because the mean is in one 
point of view the highest possible state, so neither 
of those faulty states can you have a mean state, 
excess, or defect, but howsoever done they are 
wrong : you cannot, in short, have of excess and 
defect a mean state, nor of a mean state excess and 
defect. 



CHAPTER VII 

The application of this definition to particular Virtues 

IT is not enough, however, to state this in general 
terms ; we must also apply it to particular instances, 
because in treatises on moral conduct general state- 
ments have an air of vagueness, 1 but those which go 
into detail one of greater reality : for the actions 
after all must bo in detail, and the general statements, 
to bo worth anything, must hold good here. 

We must take these details then from the Table. 2 

I. In respect of fears and confidence or boldness : 
The Mean state is Courage : men may exceed, of 

course, either in absence of fear or in positive con- 
fidence : the former has no name (which is a common 
case), the latter is called Rash : again, the man who 
has too much fear and too little confidence is called 
a Coward. 

II. In respect of pleasures and pains (but not all, 
and perhaps fewer pains than pleasures) : 

1 According to another reading, ' cover a wider ground, 
but '[Ed.] 

- This is one of the many expressions which seem to 
imply that this treatise is rather a collection of notes of a 
viva voce lecture than a set formal treatise. ' The table ' 
of virtues and vices probably was sketched out and ex- 
hibited to the audience. [Or was a commonplace among 
contemporary teachers. ED.] 



CHAP, vii ETHICS 49 

The mean state here is Temperance, the excess 
Profligacy. As for defect in respect of pleasure, there 
are practically no people who are chargeable with it, 
so, of course, there is really no name for such char- 
acters, but we will give them one and call them In- 
sensible. 

III. In respect of giving and taking wealth 3 (a) : 
The mean state is Liberality, the excess Prodi- 
gality, the defect Stinginess. Here each one of the 
extremes involves really an excess and defect contrary 
to those of the other : I mean, the prodigal gives out 
too much and takes in too little, while the stingy man 
takes in too much and gives out too little. (It must 
be understood that we are now giving merely an 
outline and summary, intentionally : we will, in a 
later part of the treatise, draw out the distinctions 
with greater exactness). 

IV. In respect of wealth (b) : 

There are other dispositions besides these just 
mentioned ; a mean state called Magnificence (for 
the magnificent man differs from the liberal, the former 
having necessarily to do with great wealth, the latter 
with small) ; the excess called by the names either of 
Want of Taste or Vulgar Profusion, and the defect 
Paltriness. These also differ from the extremes con- 
nected with liberality, and the manner of their differ 
ence shall also be spoken of later. 

V. In respect of honour and dishonour (a) : 

The mean state Greatness of Soul, the excess which 
may be called Vanity or Vainglory, and the defect 
Littleness of Soul. 

VI. In respect of honour and dishonour (b) : 

Now there is a state bearing the same relation to 
Greatness of Soul as we said just now Liberality does 
to Magnificence, with the difference, that is, of being 
about a small amount of the same tiling : this state 

3 Afterwards defined as 

' All things whose value is measured by money '. 
D 



50 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK n 

having reference to small honour, as Greatness of Soul 
to great honour. A man maj 7 , of course, grasp at 
honour in due measure, or more than he should, or 
less ; now he that exceeds in his grasping at it ia 
called ambitious, he that falls short unambitious, he 
that is just as he should be has no proper name : nor 
in fact have the states, except that the disposition of 
the ambitious man is called ambition. For this reason 
those who are in either extreme lay claim to the mean 
as a debatable land, and we call the virtuous character 
sometimes by the name ambitious, 4 sometimes by 
that of unambitious, and we commend sometimes the 
one and sometimes the other. Why we do it shall be 
said in the subsequent part of the treatise ; but now 
we will go on with the rest of the virtues after the 
plan we have laid down. 

VII. In respect of anger : 

Here too there is excess, defect, and a mean state. 
The qualities may be said to have really no proper 
names, but, as we call the virtuous character Gentle, 
we will call the mean state Gentleness, and of the ex- 
tremes, let the man who is excessive be denominated 
Passionate, and the faulty state Passionateness, and 
him who is deficient Angerless, and the defect Anger - 
lessness. 

There are also three other mean states, having some 
mutual resemblance, but still with differences. They 
are alike in that they all have for their object-matter 
intercourse of words and deeds, but they differ in that 
one has respect to truth herein, the other two to what 
is pleasant (this in two ways, the one in relaxation 
and amusement, the other in all things which occur in 
daily life). We must say a word or two about these 
also, that we may the better see that in all matters 
the mean is praiseworthy, while the extremes are 
neither right nor worthy of praise but of blame. 



4 In like manner we talk of laudable ambition, implying 
of course there may be that which is not laudable. 



CHAP, vii ETHICS 51 

Now of these, it is true, the majority have really 
no proper names, but still we must try, as in the 
other cases, to coin some for them for the sake of 
clearness and intelligibleness. 

I. In respect of truth : 

The man who is in the mean state we will call Truth- 
ful, and the disposition Truthfulness, and as to the 
disguise of truth, if it be on the side of exaggeration, 
Braggadocia, and him that has it a Braggadocio ; if 
on that of diminution, Reserve and Reserved 5 shall be 
the terms. 

II. In respect of what is pleasant in the way of 
relaxation or amusement : 

The mean state shall be called Wittiness or Geniality, 
and the character accordingly a Witty man ; the 
excess Buffoonery, and the man a Buffoon ; the man 
deficient herein a Clown [or Boor], and his state 
Clownishness. 

III. In respect of what is pleasant in daily life : 
He that is as he should bo may be called Friendly 

and his mean state Friendliness. He that exceeds, if 
it be without any interested motive, somewhat too 
Complaisant ; if with such motive, a Flatterer : he 
that is deficient and in all instances unpleasant, 
Quarrelsome and Cross. 

There are mean states likewise in mere feelings and 
matters concerning them. Shamefacedness, for in- 
stance, is no virtue, still a man is praised for being 
shamefaced : for in these too the one is denominated 
the man in the mean state, the other in the excess ; 
the Shy, for instance, who is overwhelmed with shame 
on all and any occasions : the man who is in the 
defect, i.e. who has no shame at all in his composition, 
is called Shameless : but the right character Shame- 
faced. 6 

5 ' Irony ' and ' Ironical ' arc generally used. [En.] 

6 Perhaps ' Modest ' is the neari-st English equivalent. 
The sense is ' Unobtrusive '. [ED.] 



62 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK 11 

Indignation against successful vice, 7 again, is a 
state in the mean between Envy and Malevolence. 
They all three have respect to pleasure and pain 
produced by what happens to one's neighbour. The 
man who has this right feeling is annoyed at un- 
deserved success of others, while the envious man 
goes beyond him and is annoyed at all success of 
others, and the malevolent falls so far short of feeling 
annoyance that he even rejoices [at misfortune of 
others]. 

But for the discussion of these also there will be 
another opportunity, as of Justice too, because the 
term is used in more senses than one. So after this 
we will go accurately into each and say how they are 
mean states : and in like manner also with respect to 
the Intellectual Excellences. 



CHAPTER VIII 

Of the various degrees of opposition between the faulty 
and the right states in each Virtue 

Now as there are three states in each case, two 
faulty either in the way of excess or defect, and one 
right, which is the mean state, of course all are in a 
way opposed to one another ; the extremes, for in- 
stance, not only to the mean but also to one another, 
and the mean to the extremes. For just as the half 
is greater if compared with the less portion, and 
less if compared with the greater, so the mean 
states, compared with the defects, exceed, whether 
in feelings or actions, and vice versa. The bravo 
man, for instance, shows as rash when compared with 
the coward, and cowardly when compared with the 
rash ; similarly too the temperate man viewed in 
comparison with the insensible man, shows like a 

7 An expression of Bp. Butler's which corresponds 
exactly to the defmitiou of j'tyxecris in the Rhetoric. 



CHAP, vm ETHICS 63 

profligate man, but in comparison with the man who 
really has no self-control, he looks like one indifferent 
or insensible . and the liberal man compared with the 
stingy seems prodigal, and by the side of the prodigal, 
stingy. 

And so the extreme characters would usurp the 
place of the moderate ; the brave man is called a 
rash man by the coward, and a coward by the rash 
man, and in the other cases accordingly. But, there 
being this mutual opposition, the contrariety between 
the extremes is greater than between either and the 
mean, because they are further from one another than 
from the mean, just as the greater and the less portion 
differ more from each other than either from the exact 
half. 

Again, in some cases an extreme will bear a re- 
semblance to the mean ; rashness, for instance, to 
courage, and prodigality to liberality ; but between 
the extremes there is the greatest dissimilarity. Now 
things which are furthest from one another l are 
defined to be contrary, and so the further off the 
more contrary will they be. 

Further : of the extremes in some cases the excess, 
and in others the defect, is most opposed to the mean : 
to courage, for instance, not rashness which is the 
excess, but cowardice which is the defect ; whereas 
to temperance not insensibility which is the defect, but 
profligacy which is the excess. 

And for this there are two reasons to be given. 
One is from the nature of the thing itself, because 
from the one extreme being nearer and more like the 
mean, we do not put this against it, but the other ; 
as, for instance, since rashness is thought to be nearer 
to courage than cowardice is, and to resemble it more, 



1 That is, in the same genus: to be contraries, things 
must be genericaliy connected. TO, TrXeicroi' dX\7?Xwj' diearr)- 
K&TO. TII> Iv Tt3 ai'Tiii ytvei fvavrta opifovrai, Categories, 
iv, 15. 



54 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK n 

we put cowardice against courage rather than rash- 
ness, because those things which are further from the 
mean are thought to be more contrary to it. This 
then is one reason arising from the thing itself ; there 
is another arising from our own constitution and 
make. For in each man's own case those things give 
the impression of being more contrary to the mean 
to which we individually have a natural bias. Thus 
we have a natural bias towards pleasures, for which 
reason we are much more inclined to the rejection of 
all solf-control, than to self-discipline. 

These things then, to which the bias is, we call 
more contrary, and so total want of self-control (the 
excess) is more contrary than the defect is to per- 
fected self-mastery. 



CHAPTER IX 

The practical application of the Book 

Now that Moral Virtue is a mean state, and how 
it is so, viz. that it lies between two faulty states, one 
in the way of excess and another in the way of defect, 
and that it is so because it aims at the mean both in 
feelings and actions, all this has been set forth fully 
and sufficiently. 

And so it is hard to be good : for surely hard it is 
in each instance to find the mean, just as to find the 
moan point or centre of a circle is not what any man 
can do, but only he who knows how : just so to be 
angry, to give money, to spend, is what any man can 
do, and easy : but to do these to the right person, in 
duo proportion, at the right time, with a right object, 
and in the right manner, this is not as before what any 
man can do, nor is it easy : and for this cause goodness 
is rare, and praiseworthy, and noble. 

Therefore he who aims at the mean should make 
it his first care to keep away from that extreme which 



CHAP, ix ETHICS 55 

is more contrary than the other to the mean ; just as 
Calypso in Homer advises Ulysses, 

' Clear of this smoke and surge thy barque direct ' ; 

because of the two extremes the one is more, and the 
other less, erroneous : and, therefore, since to hit 
exactly on the mean is difficult, one must take the 
least of the evils as the safest plan l ; and this a man 
will be doing, if he follows this method. 

We ought also to take into consideration our own 
natural bias, which varies in each man's case, and will 
be ascertained from the pleasure and pain arising 
in us. Furthermore, we should force ourselves off in 
the contrary direction, because we shall find ourselves 
in the mean after we have removed ourselves far 
from the wrong side, exactly as men do in straightening 
bent timber. 2 

But in all cases we must guard most carefully against 
what is pleasant, and pleasure itself, because we are 
not impartial judges of it. 

We ought to feel in fact towards pleasure as did 
the old counsellors towards Helen, and in all cases 
pronounce a similar sentence : for so by sending it 
away from us, we shall err the less. 3 



1 ' Aei/repos TrXoOs is a proverb', says the Scholiast on the 
Phcedo, ' used of those who do any thing safely and cau- 
tiously, inasmuch as they who have miscarried in their 
first voyage, set about their preparations for the second 
cautiously ' ; and he then alludes to this passage. 

2 That is, you must allow for the recoil. 

' Naturam expellas furca tamen usque recurrent'. 

3 This illustration sets in so clear a light the doctrines 
entertained respectively by Aristotle, Eudoxus, and the 
Stoics, regarding pleasure, that it is worth while to go into 
it fully. 

The reference is to Iliad iii, 154-60. The old counsellors, 
as Helen comes upon the city wall, acknowledge her sur- 
passing beauty, and have no difficulty in understanding 
how both nations should have incurred such suffering for 



56 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK n 

Well, to spoak very briefly, these are the precautions 
by adopting which wo shall be best able to attain 
the mean. 

Still, perhaps, after all it is a matter of difficulty, 
and specially in the particular instances : it is not 
easy, for instance, to determine exactly in what manner, 
with what persons, for what causes, and for what 
length of time, one ought to feel anger : for we our- 
selves sometimes praise those who are defective in 
this feeling, and we call them meek ; at another, we 
term the hot-tempered manly and spirited. 

Then, again, he who makes a small deflection from 
what is right, be it on the side of too much or too 
little, is not blamed, only he who makes a consider- 
able one : for he cannot escape observation. But to 
what point or degree a man must err in order to incur 
blame, it is not easy to determine exactly in words : 
nor in fact any of those points which are matter of 
perception by the Moral Sense : such qxicstions are 
matters of detail, and the decision of them rests with 
the Moral Sense. 4 

her sako : still, fair as she is, homo she must go, that she 
bring not ruin on themselves and their posterity. 

This exactly represents Aristotle's relation to Pleasure : 
he does not, with Eudoxus and his followers, exalt it into 
the Summum Bonum (as Paris would risk all for Helen), 
nor does he with the Stoics call it wholly evil, as Hector 
might have said that the woes Helen had caused had 
' banished all the beauty from her cheek ' ; but, with the 
aged counsellors, admits its charms, but aware of their 
dangerousness resolves to deny himself ; ho ' Feels her 
sweetness, yet defies her thrall '. 

4 A.i<r6-r]<Tis is here used as an analogous noun, to denote 
the faculty which, in respect of moral matters, discharges 
the same function that bodily sense does in respect of 
physical objects. It is worth while to notice how in our 
colloquial language we carry out the same analogy. We 
say of a transaction, that it ' looks ugly ', ' sounds oddly ', 
is a ' nasty job ', ' stinks in our nostrils ', is a ' hard 
dealing '. 



ciur. TX ETHICS 57 

At all events thus much is plain, that the mean 
state is in all things praiseworthy, and that practically 
we must deflect sometimes towards excess, sometimes 
towards defect, because this will be the easiest method 
of hitting on the moan, that is, on what is right. 

[The idea is that the man who has been properly trained 
feels, as it were instinctively, that a given action has a 
certain moral value, high or low, even though he may 
not be able to explain it in words. ED.] 



BOOK III 
CHAPTER I 

Of Involuntary Actions : first, of Compulsory 

Now since Virtue is concerned with the regulation 
of feelings and actions, and praise and blame arise 
upon such as are voluntary, while for the involuntary 
allowance is made, and sometimes compassion is 
excited, it is perhaps a necessary task for those who 
are investigating the nature of Virtue to draw out 
the distinction between what is voluntary and what 
involuntary ; and it is certainly useful for legislators, 
with respect to the assigning of honours and punish- 
ments. 

Involuntary actions then are considered to be of 
two kinds, being done either on compulsion, or by 
reason of ignorance. 

An action is compulsory, when the origination is 
external to the agent, being such that in it the agent 
(perhaps we may more properly say the patient) 
contributes nothing ; as if a wind wore to convey 
you anywhere, or men having power over your 
person. 

But when actions are done, cither from fear of 
greater evils, or from some honourable motive, as, for 
instance, if you wore ordered to commit some base act 
by a despot who had your parents or children in his 
power, and they were to be saved upon your com- 
pliance or die upon your refusal, in such cases there 
is room for a question whether the actions are voluntary 
or involuntary. 

A similar question arises with respect to cases of 
throwing goods overboard in a storm ; apart from 
special reasons, no man throws away his property 
willingly, but with a view to his own and his shipmates' 
safety any one who had any sense would do so. 

63 



CHAP, i ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS 69 

The truth is, such actions are of a mixed kind, but 
are most like voluntary actions : for they are choice- 
worthy at the time when they are being done, and the 
end or object of the action must be taken with refer- 
ence to the actual occasion. We must denominate 
an action voluntary or involuntary at the time of 
doing it. Now in the given case the man acts volun- 
tarily, because the originating of the motion of his 
limbs in such actions rests with himself ; and where 
the origination is in himself it rests with himself to do 
or not to do. 

Such actions then are voluntary, though in the 
abstract perhaps involuntary because no one would 
choose any of such things in and by itself. 

But for such actions men sometimes are even praised, 
as when they endure any disgrace or pain to secure 
great and honourable equivalents ; if vice versa, then 
they are blamed, because it shows a base mind to 
endure things very disgraceful for no honourable 
object, or for a trifling one. 

For some again no praise is given, but allowance 
is made ; as where a man does what he should not by 
reason of such things as overstrain the powers of 
human nature, or pass the limits of human endurance. 

Some acts perhaps there are for which compulsion 
cannot properly be pleaded, but a man should rather 
suffer the worst and die ; how absurd, for instance, 
are the pleas of compulsion with which Alcmaeon in 
Euripides' play excuses his matricide I 1 

But it is difficult sometimes to decide what kind 
of thing should be chosen instead of what, or what 
endured in preference to what, and much more so to 
abide by one's decisions : for in general the alter- 
natives are painful, and the actions required are base, 

1 The reference is to Alcmreon who killed his mother 
Eriphyle, rather than suffer the curse of his father Ain- 
phiaraus, who had commanded the deed. The play 
referred to is not extant. [Eo.] 



60 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK in 

and so praise or blame is awarded according as per- 
sons have suffered themselves to bo compelled or no. 

What kind of actions then are to be called com- 
pulsory ? May we say without qualification whenever 
the cause is external and the agent contributes nothing, 
that where the acts are in themselves involuntary but 
choice-worthy at the present time and in preference 
to such and such things, and where the origination 
rests with the agent, the actions are in themselves 
involuntary, but at the given time and in preference to 
such and such things voluntary ; and they are more 
like voluntary than involuntary, because the actions 
consist of particulars, and these are voluntary. 

But what kind of things one ought to choose instead 
of what, it is not easy to settle, for there are many 
differences in the particular instances. 

But suppose a person should say, things pleasant 
and honourable exert a compulsive force (for that 
they are external and do compel) ; at that rate every 
action is on compulsion, because these are universal 
motives of action. 

Again, they who act on compulsion and against 
their will do so with pain ; but they who act by reason 
of what is pleasant or honourable act with pleasure. 

It is truly absurd for a man to attribute his actions 
to external things instead of to his own capacity for 
being easily caught by them ; or, again, to ascribe 
the honourable to himself, and the base ones to pleasure 
[i.e. to an external force. ED.]. 

So then that seems to be compulsory ' whoso 
origination is from without, the party compelled con- 
tributing nothing'. 



CHAP, ii ETHICS 61 



CHAPTER II 

Of the second kind of livxAuntary Actions. By reason of 
Ignorance 

Now every action of which ignorance is the cause 
is non-voluntary, but that only is involuntary which 
is attended with pain and remorse : for clearly the 
man who has done any thing by reason of ignorance, 
but is not annoyed at his own action, cannot be said 
to have done it with his will [i.e. voluntarily ED.] 
because he did not know he was doing it, nor again 
against his will [i.e. involuntarily ED.] because he is 
not sorry for it. 

So then of the class ' acting by reason of ignorance ', 
he who feels rtgret afterwards is thought to be an in- 
voluntary agent, and him that has no such feeling, 
since he certainly is different from the other, we will 
call a non-voluntary agent : for as there is a real 
difference it is better to have a proper name. 

Again, there seems to be a difference between acting 
becau-se of ignorance and acting in ignorance : for 
instance, we do not usually assign ignorance as the 
cause of the actions of the drunken or angry man, 
but either the drunkenness or the anger, yet they act 
not knowingly but in ignorance. 

Agr.in, every bad man is ignorant what he ought 
to do and what to leave undone, and by reason of 
such error men become unjust and wholly evil. 

Again, we do not usually apply the term involuntary 
when a man is ignorant of what is expedient J ; because 

-Virtue is not only the duty, but (by the laws of the 
Moral Government of the World) also the interest of Man, 
or. to express i: in Bp. Butler's manner, Conscience and 
Reasonable Self-love are the two principles in our nature 
which of rizht have supremacy over the rest, and these 
two lead in point of fact to the same course of action. 
(Sermon n.j 



62 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK in 

ignorance as to the means 2 constitutes depravity 
but not involuntariness : nor does any ignorance of 
principle (because for this men are blamed) but ignor- 
ance in particular details, as to the persons or things 
involved, for in these there is both compassion and 
allowance, because he who acts in ignorance of any 
of them acts in a proper sense involuntarily. 

It may be as well, therefore, to define these par- 
ticular details, what they are, and how many ; viz. 
who acts, what he is doing, with respect to what or in 
what, sometimes with what, as with what instrument, 
and with what result (as that of preservation, for 
instance), and how, as whether softly or violently. 

All these particulars, in one and the same case, no 
man in his senses could be ignorant of ; plainly not 
of the agent, being himself. But what he is doing 
a man may be ignorant, as men in speaking say a 
thing escaped them unawares ; or as ^Eschylus 3 did 
with respect to the Mysteries, that he was not aware 
that it was unlawful to speak of them ; or as in the 
case of that catapult accident the other day the man 
said he discharged it merely to display its operation. 
Or a person might suppose a son to be an enemy, as 
Merope 4 did ; or that the spear really pointed was 
rounded off ; or that the stone was a pumice ; or in 
striking with a view to save might kill ; or might 
strike when merely wishing to spar, as people do in 
sham-fighting. 

Now, since ignorance is possible in respect to all 

2 Any ignorance of particular facts affects the right- 
ness not of the irpa^is, but of the irpay^a. ; but ignorance of, 
i.e. incapacity to discern, Principles, shows the Moral 
Constitution to have been depraved, i.e. shows Conscience 
to be perverted, or the sight of Self-love to be impaired. 

3 /Eschylus is said to have been accused of giving away 
secrets of the Eleusinian mysteries. [En.] 

4 In a lost play of Euripides, Merope, hearing that her 
son has been murdered, is on the point of killing her son, 
mistaking him for the murderer. [Eo.] 



OHAP. in ETHICS 63 

these details, he that acted in ignorance of any of 
them is thought to have acted involuntarily, and he 
most so who was in ignorance as regards the most 
important, which are thought to be the persons con- 
cerned, and the result. 

Further, not only must the ignorance be of this 
kind, to constitute an action involuntary, but it must 
be also understood that the action is followed by pain 
and regret. 



CHAPTER III 

Voluntary Action defined. Actions which are caused 
by Anger or Lust are not therefore Involuntary 

Now since all involuntary action is either upon 
compulsion or by reason of ignorance, Voluntary 
Action would seem to be ' that whose origination is 
in the agent, he being aware of the particular details 
in which the action consists '. 

For, it may be, men are not justified by calling 
those actions involuntary, which are done by reason 
of Anger or Lust. 

Because, in the first place, if this be so, no other 
animal but man, and not even children, can be said 
to act voluntarily. Next, is it meant that we never 
act voluntarily when we act from Lust or Anger, or 
that we act voluntarily in doing what is right and 
involuntarily in doing what is discreditable ? The 
latter supposition is absurd, since the cause is one 
and the same. Then as to the former, it is a strange 
thing to maintain actions to be involuntary which 
we ought to grasp at : now there are occasions on 
which anger is a duty, 1 and there are things which 

1 Bp. Butler would agree to this : he says of settled 
deliberate anger, ' It seems in us plainly connected with 
a sense of virtue and vice, of moral good and evil '. See 
the whole 'Sermon on Resentment'. 



64 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK in 

we are bound to lust after, 2 health, for instance, and 
learning. 

Again, whereas actions strictly involuntary are 
thought to bo attended with pain, those which are 
done to gratify lust are thought to be pleasant. 

Again : how does the involuntariness make any 
difference between wrong actions done from deliberate 
calculation, and those done by reason of anger ? For 
both ought to bo avoided, and tho irrational feelings 
are thought to be just as natural to man as reason, 
and so of course must bo such actions of the individual 
as are done from Anger and Lust. It is absurd then 
to class these actions among tho involuntary. 



CHAPTER IV 

Of Deliberate Choice l or Will 

HAVING thus drawn out the distinction between 
voluntary and involuntary action our next step is 
to examine into the nature of Choice, because this 
seems most intimately connected with Virtue and to be 
a more decisive test of character than a man's acts are. 

Now Choice is plainly voluntary, but the two are 
not co- extensive, voluntary being the more compre- 
hensive term : for first, children and all other animals 
share in voluntary action but not in Choice ; and 
next, impulsive actions we call voluntary but do not 
ascribe them to deliberate Choice. 

- Aristotle has, I venture to think, rather quibbled here, 
by using tiriOvfjLia. and its verb, equivocally : as there is no 
following his argument without condescending to the same 
device, I havo used our word lust in its ancient signifi- 
cation. Ps. xxiv, 12, ' What man is he that lusteth to 
live'. 

1 Or Purpose, i.e. the deliberate selection of one alter- 
native course, on principle. [Eo.J 



CHAP, rv ETHICS 65 

Nor do they appear to be right who say it is lust 
or anger, or wish, or opinion of a certain kind ; be- 
cause, in the first place, Choice is not shared by the 
irrational animals, while Lust and Anger are. Next, 
the man who fails of self-control acts from Lust but 
not from Choice ; the man of self-control, on the 
contrary, from Moral Choice, not from Lust. 2 Again, 
whereas Lust is frequently opposed to Moral Choice, 
one Lust is not to another Lust. 

Lastly, the object-matter of Lust is the pleasant 
and the painful but of Moral Choice neither the one 
nor the other. 

Still less can it be Anger, because actions done 
from Anger are thought generally to be least of all 
consequent on deliberate Choice. 

Nor is it Wish either, though appearing closely 
connected with it ; because, in the first place, Moral 
Choice has not for its objects impossibilities, and if a 
man were to say he chose them he would be thought 
to be a fool : lout Wish may have impossible things 
for its objects, exemption from death, for instance. 

Wish again may be exercised on things in the ac- 
complishment of which one's self could have nothing 
to do, as the success of any particular actor or athlete : 
but no man chooses tilings of this nature, only such as 
he believes he may himself bo instrumental in pro- 
curing. 

Further, Wish has for its Object the End rather, 
but Choice the means to the End ; for instance, we 
wish to be healthy but we choose the means which 
will make us so ; or happiness again we wish for, 
and commonly say so, but to say we choose is not an 
appropriate term, because, in short, the province of 
Choice seems to be those things which are in our power. 

Neither can it be Opinion : for Opinion is thought 
to be unlimited in its range of objects, and to be 

2 The Continent and Incontinent are hero contrasted. 

-[ED.] 



66 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK ni 

exercised as well upon things eternal and impossible 
as on those which are in our own power : again, 
Opinion is logically divided into true and false, not 
into good and bad, as Choice is. 

However, nobody perhaps maintains its identity 
with Opinion simply ; but it is not the same with any 
particular opinion, 3 because by choosing good and 
bad things we are constituted of a certain character, 
but by having opinions on them we are not. 

Again, we choose to take or avoid, and so on, but 
we opine what a thing is, or for what it is serviceable, 
or how : but we do not opine to take or avoid. 

Further, Moral Choice is commended rather for 
having a right object or for being judicious, but Opinion 
for being formed in accordance with truth. 

Again, we choose such things as we pretty well 
know to be good but we form opinions respecting such 
as we do not know at all. 

And it is not thought that choosing and opining 
best always go together, but that some opine the 
better course, and yet by reason of viciousness choose 
not the things which they should. 

It may be urged, that Opinion always precedes or 
accompanies Moral Choice ; be it so, this makes no 
difference, for this is not the point in question, but 
whether Moral Choice is the same as Opinion of some 
kind. 

Since then it is none of the aforementioned things, 
what is it, or how is it characterized ? Voluntary it 
plainly is, but not all voluntary action is willed. May 

3 i.e. on objects of Moral Choice ; opinion of this kind 
is not the same as Moral Choice, because actions alone 
form habits and constitute character : opinions are in 
general signs of character, but when they begin to be 
acted on they ceaso to be opinions, and merge in Moral 
Choice. 

' Treason doth never prosper : what's the reason ? 
When it doth prosper, none dare call it Treason.' 



CHAP, v ETHICS 67 

we not say then, it is ' that voluntary which has 
passed through a stage of previous deliberation ' ? 
because Moral Choice is attended with reasoning and 
intellectual process. The etymology of its Greek 
name seems to give a hint of it, being when analysed 
' chosen in preference to somewhat else '. 



CHAPTER V 

Of Deliberation 

WELL then ; do men deliberate about everything, 
and is any thing soever the object of Deliberation, 
or are there some matters with respect to which there 
is none ? (It may be as well perhaps to say, that by 
' object of Deliberation ' is meant such matter as a 
sensible man would deliberate upon, not what any 
fool or madman might.) 

Well, about eternal things no one deliberates, as, 
for instance, the universe, or the incommensurability 
of the diameter and side of a square. 

Nor again about things which change but always 
in the same way, either necessarily, or naturally, or 
from some other cause, as the solstices or the sunrise. 

Nor about those which are variable, as drought 
and rains ; nor fortuitous matters, as finding of 
treasure. 

Nor in fact even about all human affairs ; no Lacedae- 
monian, for instance, deliberates as to the best course 
for the Scythian Government to adopt ; because in 
such cases we have no power over the result. 

But we do deli berate respecting such practical 
matters as are in our own power (which are what are 
left after all our exclusions). 

I have adopted this division because causes seem 
to be divisible into nature, necessity, chance, and 
moreover intellect, and all human powers. 



68 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK m 

And man in general deliberates about what man in 
general can effect. 

Again, wo do not deliberate respecting such arts 
or sciences as are exact and independent : as, for 
instance, about written characters, because we have 
no doubt how they should be formed : but we do 
deliberate on all such things as are usually done 
through our own instrumentality, but not invariably 
in the same way ; as, for instance, about matters 
connected with the healing art, or with money-making ; 
and, again, more about piloting ships than gymnastic 
exercises, because the former has been less exactly 
determined, and so forth : and more about arts than 
sciences, because we more frequently doubt respecting 
the former. 

So then Deliberation takes place in such matters 
as are under general laws but still uncertain how in 
any given case they will issue, i.e. in which there is 
some uncertainty : and for great matters we associate 
coadjutors in counsel, distrusting our ability to settle 
them alone. 

Further, we deliberate not about Ends, but Means 
to Ends : no physician, for instance, deliberates 
whether he will cure, nor orator whether he will per- 
suade, nor statesman whether he will produce a good 
constitution, nor in fact any man in any other function 
about his particular End : but having set before them 
a certain End they look how and through what means 
it may be accomplished : if there is a choice of means, 
they examine further which are easiest and most 
creditable ; or, if there is but one means of accom- 
plishing the object, then how it may be through this, 
this again through what, till they come to the first 
cause. And this will be the last found ; for a man 
engaged in a process of deliberation seems to seek 
and analyse, as a man, to solve a [geometrical] problem, 
analyses the figure given him. And plainly not every 
search is Deliberation (those in mathematics to wit) 
but every Deliberation is a search, and the last step 



CHAP, v ETHICS 69 

in the analysis is the first in the constructive process. 
And if in the course of their search men come upon an 
impossibility, they give it up ; if money, for instance, 
be necessary, but cannot be got : but if the thing 
appears possible they then attempt to do it. 

And by possible I mean what may be done through 
our own instrumentality (of course what may be 
done through our friends is through our own instru- 
mentality in a certain sense, because the origination 
in such cases rests with us). And the object of search 
is sometimes the necessary instruments, sometimes the 
method of using them ; and similarly in the rest some- 
times through what, and sometimes how or through 
whom. 

So it seems, as has been said, that Man is the origin- 
ator of his actions : and Deliberation has for its object 
whatever may be done through one's own instrument- 
ality, and the actions are with a view to other things ; 
and so it is, not the End, but the Means to Ends, on 
which Deliberation is employed. 

Nor, again, is it employed on isolated facts, as 
whether the substance before me is bread, or has 
been properly cooked : for these come under the 
province of sense, and if a man is to be always de- 
liberating, he may go on ad infinitum. 

Further, exactly the same matter is the object both 
of Deliberation and Moral Choice ; but that which is 
the object of Moral Choice is already defined and 
determined, because by 'object of Moral Choice' is 
denoted that which after Deliberation has been pre- 
ferred to something else : for each man leaves off 
searching how he shall do a thing when he has brought 
the origination up to himself, i.e. to the governing 
principle in himself, because it is this which makes 
the choice. A good illustration of this is furnished 
by the old regal constitutions which Homer drew from, 
in which the Kings would announce to the commonalty 
what they had determined before. 

Now since that which is the object of Moral Choice 



70 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK 111 

is something in our own power, and also is the object 
of deliberation and the grasping of the Will, Moral 
Choice must be ' the deliberate choosing of some 
course of action within our power ', because after having 
deliberated we decide, and then desire in accordance 
with the result of our deliberation. 

Let this be accepted as a sketch of Moral Choice, 
and of its scope, i.e. ' Means to Ends'. 



CHAPTER VI 
Of Wish 

THAT Wish has for its object-matter the End, has 
been already stated ; but there are two opinions 
respecting it ; some thinking that its object is real 
good, others that which seems good. 

Now those who maintain that the object of Wish 
is real good are beset by this difficulty, that what is 
wished for by him who chooses wrongly is not really 
an object of Wish (because, on their theory, if it is 
an object of wish, it must be good, but it is, in the 
case supposed, evil). Those who maintain, on the 
contrary, that that which seems good is properly the 
object of Wish, have to meet this difficulty, that there 
is nothing naturally an object of Wish but that each 
individual desires what seems good to him ; now 
difleront people have different notions, and it may 
chance contrary ones. 

But, if those opinions do not satisfy us, may we 
not say that, in the abstract and as a matter of ob- 
jective truth, the really good is the object of Wish, 
but to each individual whatever impresses his mind 
with the notion of good. And so to the good man 
that is an object of Wish which is really and truly 
so, but to the bad man anything may be ; just as 
physically those things are wholesome to the healthy 
which are really so, but other things to the sick. And 



CHAP, vn ETHICS 71 

so too of bitter and sweet, and hot and heavy, and so 
on. For the good man judges in every instance 
correctly, and in every instance the notion conveyed 
to his mind is the true one. 

For there are fair and pleasant things peculiar to 
each state : and perhaps the most distinguishing 
characteristic of the good man is his seeing the truth 
in every instance, he being, in fact, the rule and measure 
of these matters. 

The multitude of men seem to be deceived by 
reason of pleasure, because when it is not really a 
good it seems so, and thus they choose what is pleasant 
as good and avoid pain as an evil 



CHAPTER VII 
Of the Free Agency of Man 

Now since the End is the object of Wish, and the 
means to the End of Deliberation and Choice, the 
actions regarding these matters must be in the way 
of Choice, i.e. voluntary: but the acts of working out 
the virtues are such, and therefore Virtue is in our 
power. 

And so too is Vice : because wherever it is in our 
power to do, it is also in our power to forbear doing, 
and vice versa, therefore if the doing (being in a given 
case creditable) is in our power, so too is the for- 
bearing (which is in the same case discreditable), 
and vice versa. 

But if it is in our power to do and to forbear doing 
what is creditable or the contrary, and these respect- 
ively constitute the being good or bad, then being good 
or vicious is in our power. 

As for the well-known saying ' Xo man voluntarily 
is wicked or involuntarily blessed ', it is partly true, 
partly false : for no man is blessed against his will, 
of course, but wickedness is voluntary. Else must we 



72 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK in 

dispute the statements lately made, and deny that 
Man is the originator or generator of his actions as he 
is of his children ? 

But if this is matter of plain manifest fact, and we 
cannot refer our actions to any other originations 
beside those in our own power, those tilings must be 
in our own power, and so voluntary, the originations 
of which are in ourselves. 

Moreover, te-.timony seems to be borne to these 
positions both privately by individuals, and by law- 
givers too, in that they chastise and punish those who 
do wrong (unless they do so on compulsion, or by 
reason of ignorance which is not self-caused), while 
they honour those who act rightly, under the notion 
of being likely to encourage the latter and restrain 
the former. But such things as are not in our own 
power, i.e. not voluntary, no one thinks of encouraging 
us to do, knowing it to be of no avail for one to have 
been persuaded not to feel heat (for instance), or pain, 
or hunger, and so forth, because we shall have those 
sensations all the same. 

And what makes the case stronger is this, that 
they chastise for the very fact of ignorance, when it 
is thought to be self-caused. To the drunken, for 
instance, penalties are double, because the origination 
in such case lies in a man's own self ; for he might 
have helped getting drunk and this is the cause of his 
ignorance. 

Again, those also who are ignorant of legal regu- 
lations which they are bound to know, and which are 
not hard to know, they chastise : and similarly in all 
other cases where neglect is thought to be the cause 
of the ignorance, under the notion that it was in their 
power to prevent their ignorance, because they might 
have paid attention. 

But perhaps a man is of such a character that he 
cannot attend to such things. Still men are them- 
selves the causes of having become such characters by 
li viug carelessly, and also of being unjust or profligate, 



CHAP, vn ETHICS 73 

the former by doing evil actions, the latter by spend- 
ing their time in drinking and such like ; because 
the particular acts of working form corresponding 
characters, as is shown by those who are practising 
for any contest or particular course of action, for such 
men go into training. 

As for the plea, that a man did not know that habits 
are produced from repeated acts of a given kind, we 
reply, such ignorance is a mark of excessive stupidity. 

Furthermore, it is wholly irrelevant to say that 
the man who acts unjustly or dissolutely does not 
tci-sh to attain the habits of these vices : for if a man 
wittingly does those things whereby he must become 
unjust, he is to all intents and purposes unjust volun- 
tarily ; but he cannot with a wish cease to be unjust 
and become just. For, to take the analogous case, 
the sick man cannot with a wish be well again, yet 
in a supposable case he is voluntarily ill because he 
has produced his sickness by living intemperately and 
disregarding his physicians. There was a time then 
when he might have helped being ill, but now he has 
let himself go he cannot any longer ; just as he who 
has let a stone out of his hand cannot recall it, 1 and 
yet it rested with him to aim and throw it, because 
original act was in his power. Just so the unjust or 
the profligate might originally have helped being what 
they are, and so they are voluntarily what they are : 
but now that they are become so they no longer have 
the power of being otherwise. 

And not only are mental diseases voluntary, but 

1 A stone once set in motion cannot be recalled, because 
it is then placed under the operation of natural laws which 
cannot be controlled or altered : so too in Moral declension, 
there is a point at which gravitation operates irretrievably, 
' there is a certain bouDcl to imprudence and misbehaviour, 
which being transgressed, there remains no place for repent- 
ance in the natural course of things : . Bp. Butler's Analogy, 
First Part, ch. ii. 



74 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK HI 

the bodily are so in some men, whom we accordingly 
blame : for such as are naturally deformed no one 
blames, only such as are so by reason of want of exer- 
cise, and neglect. And so too of weakness and maiming : 
no one would think of upbraiding, but would rather 
compassionate, a man, who is blind by nature, or 
from disease, or from an accident : but every one 
would blame him who was so from excess of wine, 
or any other kind of intemperance. It seems, then, 
that in respect of bodily diseases, those which depend 
on ourselves are censured, those which do not are 
not censured : and if so, then in the case of the mental 
disorders, those which are censured must depend upon 
ourselves. 

But suppose a man to say, ' all men aim at that 
which conveys to their minds an impression of good, 
and that men have no control over this impression, 
but that the End impresses each with a notion corres- 
pondent to his own individual character '. The answer 
is that, to be sure, if each man is in a way the cause of 
his own moral state, so he will be also of the kind of 
impression ho receives. But, if this is not so, no one 
is the cause to himself of doing evil actions, but he 
does them by reason of ignorance of the true End, 
supposing that through their means he will secure the 
chief good. Further, that this aiming at the End is 
no matter of one's own choice, but one must be born 
with a power of mental vision, so to speak, whereby 
to j udge fairly and choose that which is really good ; 
and he is blessed by nature who has this gift : because 
it is the most important thing and the fairest, and 
what a man cannot got or learn from another but will 
have such as nature has given it ; and for this to be 
so given well and fairly would be excellence of nature 
in the highest and truest sense. 

If all this be true, how will Virtue be a whit more 
voluntary than Vice ? Alike to the good man and 
the bad, the End gives its impression and is 
fixed by nature or howsoever you like to say, and 



. vtn ETHICS 75 

they act so and so, referring everything else to this 
End. 

Whether then we suppose that the End impresses 
each man's mind with certain notions not merely by 
nature, but that there is somewhat also dependent on 
himself, or that the End is given by nature, and yet 
Virtue is voluntary because the good man does all 
the rest voluntarily, Vice must be equally so ; because 
his own agency equally attaches to the bad man in 
the actions, even if not in the selection of the End. 

If then, as is commonly said, the Virtues are volun- 
tary, (because we at least co-operate 2 in producing 
our moral states, and we assume the End to be of a 
certain kind according as we are ourselves of certain 
characters), the Vices must be voluntary also, because 
the cases are exactly similar. 



CHAPTER VIII 

Recapitulation of points settled respecting Moral Virtues 

WELL now, we have stated generally respecting the 
Moral Virtues, their nature (in outline), that they are 
mean states, and that they are habits, and how they 
are formed, and that they manifest themselves in acts 
of the kind which produced them, and that they are 
in our own power and voluntary, and are done as 
right Reason may direct. 

But the particular actions and the habits are not 
voluntary in the same sense : for of the actions we 
are masters from beginning to end (supposing of course 
a knowledge of the particular details) ; but only of 
the origination of the habits, the addition by small 
particular accessions not being cognizable (as is the 

2 Habits being formed by acting in a certain way under 
certain circumstances, we can only choose how we will 
act, not what circumstances wo will have to act under. 



76 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK m 

case with sicknesses) : still they are voluntary in so 
far as it rested with us to use our circumstances this 
way or that. 



CHAPTER IX 

The Moral Virtues described in detail. First, of Courage 

HEBE we will resume the particular discussion of 
the Moral Virtues, and say what they are, what is 
their object-matter, and how they stand respectively 
related to it : of course their number will be thereby 
shown. 

First, then, of Courage. Now that it is a mean 
state, in respect of fear and boldness, has been already 
said : further, the causes of fear are obviously things 
fearful or, in general, evils ; which accounts for the 
common definition of fear, viz. ' expectation of evil '. 

Now we fear evils of all kinds, disgrace for instance, 
poverty, disease, desolateness, death ; but not all 
these seem to be the object-matter of the Brave man, 
because there are things which to fear is right and noble, 
and not to fear is base ; disgrace, for example, since 
he who fears this is a good man and has a sense of 
honour, and he who does not fear it is shameless 
(though there are those who call him Brave by analogy, 
because ho somewhat resembles the Brave man who 
agrees with him in being free from fear) ; but poverty, 
perhaps, or disease, and in fact whatever does not 
proceed from viciousness, nor is attributable to his own 
fault, a man ought not to fear : still, being fearless in 
respect of these would not constitute a man Brave in 
the proper sense of the term. 

Yet we do apply the term l by analogy : for there 
are men who, though timid in the dangers of war, are 
liberal men and are stout enough to face loss of wealth. 

1 ' Moral Courage ' is our phrase. 



CHAP, ix ETHICS 77 

And, again, a man is not a coward for fearing insult 
to his wife or children, or envy, or any such thing ; 
nor is he a Brave man for being bold when going to be 
scourged. 

What kind of fearful things then do constitute the 
true sphere of the Brave man ? first of all, must they 
not be the greatest, since no man is more apt to with- 
stand what is dreadful ? Now the object of the 
greatest dread is death, because it is the end of all 
things, and the dead man is thought to be beyond 
both good and eviL Still it would seem that the Brave 
man has not for his sphere even death in every circum- 
stance (on the sea, for example, or in sickness). In 
what circumstances then ? must it not be in the most 
honourable ? Such is death in war, because it is death 
in the greatest and most honourable danger : and 
this is confirmed by the honours awarded in free 
communities, and by monarchs. 

He then may be most properly denominated Brave 
who is fearless in respect of honourable death and 
such sudden emergencies as threaten death ; now 
such specially are those which arise in the course of 
war. 

It is not meant but that the Brave Man will be 
fearless also on the sea (and in sickness), but not in 
the same way as seafaring men : for these are light- 
hearted and hopeful by reason of their experience, 
while landsmen, though Brave, are apt to give them- 
selves up for lost and shudder at the notion of such 
a death : to which it should be added that Courage 
is exerted in circumstances which admit of doing 
something to help one's self, or in which death would 
be honourable ; now neither of these requisites attaches 
to destruction by drowning or sickness. 



78 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK in 

CHAPTER X 

Courage (continued) 

AOATO, ' fearful ' is a term of relation, the same thing 
not being so to all, yet there is according to common 
parlance somewhat so fearful as to be beyond human 
endurance : this of course would be fearful to every 
man of sense, but as the affairs of men generally 
differ in magnitude and admit of degrees, so too the 
objects of confidence or boldness. 

Now the Brave man keeps his nerve (so far as a 
man can) ; fear such things indeed he will, but ho 
will stand up against them as he ought and as right 
reason may direct, with a view to what is honourable, 1 
because this is the end of the virtue. 

Now it is possible to fear those things too much, 
or too little, or again to fear what is not really fearful 
as if it were such. So errors arise either when a man 
fears when he ought not to fear at all, or fears in an 
improper way, or at a wrong time, and so forth : and 
so too in respect of tilings inspiring confidence. He 
is Brave then who withstands, and fears, and is bold, 
in respect of right objects, from a right motive, in 
right manner, and at right times : since the Brave 
man suffers or acts as he ought and as right reason 
may direct. 

Now the end of every separate act is that which 
accords with the habit ; to the Brave man Courage 
is honourable ; therefore such is also the End, since 
the character of each is determined by the End. 

So honour is the motive from which the Brave 



1 This is the first appearance of the phrase which ia 
really the keystone of the Aristotelian Ethics, ' Good 
for Good's sake '. [En.] 



CHAP, x ETHICS 79 

man withstands things fearful and performs the acts 
which accord with Courage. 2 

Of the characters on the side of Excess, he who 
exceeds in utter absence of fear has no appropriate 
name (I observed before that many states have none), 
but he would be a madman or inaccessible to pain 
who feared nothing, neither earthquake, nor the 
billows, as they tell of the Celts. 

He who exceeds in confidence in respect of things 
fearful is rash. He is thought moreover to be a 
braggart, and to advance unfounded claims to the 
character of Brave : the relation which the Brave 
man really bears to objects of fear this man wishes 
to appear to bear, and so imitates him in whatever 
points he can. For this reason most of them exhibit 
a curious mixture of rashness and cowardice : because 
they talk large, and then take to their heels. 

The man moreover who exceeds in feeling fear is 
a coward, since there attach to him the circumstances 
of fearing wrong objects, in wrong ways, and so forth. 
He is deficient also in feeling confidence, but he is most 
clearly seen as exceeding in the case of pains ; he is 
a faint-hearted kind of man, for he fears all things : 
the Brave man is just the contrary, for boldness is the 
property of the light -hearted and hopeful. 

So the coward, the rash, and the Brave man have 
exactly the same sphere, but stand differently related 
to it : the two first-mentioned respectively exceed 
and are deficient, the last is in a mean state and as 
he ought to be. The rash are precipitate, and, being 
eager before danger, when actually in it, fall away, 
while the Brave are quick and sharp in action but 
before are quiet and composed. 

Well then, as has been said, Courage is a mean 
state in respect of objects inspiring boldness or fear, 

2 i.e. both Courage and a given courageous act are 
noble ; therefore both are desirable to the truly courageous 
man. [Eo.] 



80 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK m 

in the circumstances which have boon stated, and 
the Brave man chooses his line and withstands danger 
either because to do so is honourable or because not 
to do so is base. But dying to escape from poverty, 
or the pangs of love, or anything that is simply pain- 
ful, is the act not of a Brave man but of a coward : 
because it is mere softness to fly from what is toilsome, 
and the suicide braves the terrors of death not because 
it is honourable but to get out of the reach of evil. 



CHAPTER XI 

Of the Spurious or Imperfect forms of Courage 

COURAGE proper is somewhat of the kind I have 
described, but there are dispositions, differing in five 
ways, 1 which also bear in common parlance the name 
of Courage. 

We will take first that which bears most resemblance 
to the true, the Courage of Citizenship, so named 
because the motives which are thought to actuate the 
members of a community in braving danger are the 
penalties and disgrace held out by the laws to coward- 
ice, and the dignities conferred on the Brave ; which 
is thought to be the reason why those are the bravest 
people among whom cowards are visited with disgrace 
and the Bravo held in honour. 

Such is the kind of Courage Homer exhibits in his 
characters ; Diomed and Hector, for example. The 
latter says 2 : 

' Polydamas will be the first to fix 
Disgrace upon me.' 

1 For true Courage is required ( 1 ) Exact appreciation of 
clangor ; (2) A proper motive for resisting fear. Each of 
the Spurious kinds will be found to fail in one or other, or 
both. 

2 Iliad, xxii, 200. [En.] 



CHAP, xi ETHICS 81 

Diomed again 3 : 

' For Hector surely will hereafter say, 
Speaking in Troy, Tydides by my hand ' 

This I say most nearly resembles the Courage before 
spoken of, because it arises from virtue, from a feeling 
of shame, and a desire of what is noble (that is, of 
honour), and avoidance of disgrace which is base. 

In the same rank one would be inclined to place 
those also who act under compulsion from their com- 
manders ; j-et are they really lower, because not a 
sense of honour but fear is the motive from which they 
act, and what they seek to avoid is not that which is 
base but that which is simply painful : commanders 
do in fact compel their men sometimes, as Hector says 
(to quote Homer again 4 ) : 

But whomsoever I shall find cowering afar from the fight, 
The teeth of dogs he shall by no means escape.' 

Those commanders who station staunch troops by 
doubtful ones, 5 or who beat their men if they flinch, 
or who draw their troops up in line with the trenches, 
or other similar obstacles, in their rear, do in effect 
the same as Hector, for they all use compulsion. 

But a man is to be Brave, not on compulsion, but 
from a sense of honour. 

In the next place, Experience and Skill in the various 
particulars is thought to be a species of Courage : 
whence Socrates also thought that Courage was know- 
ledge. 6 

This quality is exhibited of course by different men 
under different circumstances, but in warlike matters, 
with which we are now concerned, it is exhibited by 

2 Iliad, viii, 148. [En.] - Iliad, xv, 348. 

5 This may merely mean, ' who give strict orders ' not 
to flinch, which would imply the necessity of compulsion. 
The word is capable of the sense given above, which seems 
more forcible. 

b See Book vi, ch. xiii near the end. 



82 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK m 

the soldiers (' the regulars ') : for there are, it would 
seem, many things in war of no real danger 7 which 
these have been constantly used to see ; so they have 
a show of Courage because other people are not aware 
of the real nature of these things. Then again by 
reason of their skill they are better able than any 
others to inflict without suffering themselves, because 
they are able to use their arms and have such as are 
most serviceable both with a view to offence and 
defence. So that their case is parallel to that of 
armed men fighting with unarmed or trained athletes 
with untrained, since in contests of this kind those 
are the best fighters, not who are the bravest men, 
but who are the strongest and are in the best condition. 

In fact, the regular troops come to be cowards 
whenever the danger is greater than their means of 
meeting it ; supposing, for example, that they are 
inferior in numbers and resources : then they are the 
first to fly, but the mere militia stand and fall on the 
ground (which as you know really happened at the 
Hermseum s ), for in the eyes of these flight was dis- 
graceful and death preferable to safety bought at 
such a price : while 'the regulars ' originally went 
into the danger under a notion of their own superiority, 
but on discovering their error they take to flight, 
having greater fear of death than of disgrace : but 
this is not the feeling of the Brave man. 

Thirdly, mere Animal Spirit 9 is sometimes brought 



1 Such as the noise, the rapid movements, and apparent 
confusion which to an inexperienced eye and ear would 
be alarming. So Livy says of the Gauls, v. 37 : 'Nata in 
vanos tumultus gens'. 

8 In Coronea in Bocotia, on the occasion of the citadel 
being betrayed to some Phocians. ' The regulars ' were 
Bccotian troops, the iro\iTiKa. (citizen-troops) Coroneans. 

51 i.e. unintelligent passion or fury, when a man is carried 
away by a mere lust for blood ' seeing red ', as we say, 
or ' Bcrseker rage '. [ED.] 



CHAP, xi ETHICS 83 

under the term Courage : they are thought to be 
Brave who are carried on by mere Animal Spirit, 
as are wild boasts against those who have wounded 
them, because in fact the really Brave have much 
Spirit, there being nothing like it for going at danger 
of any kind ; whence those frequent expressions in 
Homer, ' infused strength into his spirit ', ' roused his 
wrath and spirit ', or, again, ' and keen wrath in his 
nostrils ', ' his blood boiled ' : for all these seem to 
denote the arousing and impetuosity of the Animal 
Spirit. 

Now they that are truly Brave act from a sense 
of honour, and this Animal Spirit co-operates with 
them : but wild beasts from pain, that is because 
they have been wounded, or are frightened ; since 
if they are quietly in their own haunts, forest or 
marsh, they do not attack men. Surely they are 
not truly Brave because they rush into danger when 
goaded on by pain and mere Spirit, without any view 
of the danger : else would asses be Brave when they 
are hungry, for though beaten they will not then 
leave their pasture. Adulterers besides do many 
bold actions by reason of their lust. We may con- 
clude then that they arc not Brave, who are goaded 
on to meet danger by pain and more Spirit ; but still 
this temper which arises from Animal Spirit appears 
to be most natural, and would be Courage of the true 
kind if it could have added to it Moral Choice and 
the proper motive. 

So men also are pained by a feeling of anger, and 
take pleasure in revenge : but they who fight from 
these causes may be good fighters, but they are not 
truly Brave (in that they do not act from a sense of 
honour, nor as reason directs, but merely from the 
present feeling) ; still they bear some resemblance to 
that character. 

Nor, again, are the Sanguine and Hopeful properly 
Brave : since their boldness in dangers arises from 
their frequent victories over numerous foes. The two 



84 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK m 

characters are alike, however, in that both are con- 
fident ; but then the Brave are so from the afore- 
mentioned causes, whereas these are so from a settled 
conviction of their being superior and not likely to 
suffer anything in return (they who are intoxicated 
do much the same, for they become hopeful when in 
that state) ; but when the event disappoints their 
expectations they run away : now it was said to be 
the character of a Brave man to withstand things 
which are fearful to a man or produce that impression, 
because it is honourable so to do and the contrary is 
dishonourable. 

For this reason it is thought to be a greater proof 
of Courage to be fearless and undisturbed under the 
pressure of sudden fear than under that which may 
be anticipated, because Courage then conies rather 
from a fixed habit, or less from preparation ; since as 
to foreseen dangers a man might take his line from 
calculation and reasoning, but in those which are 
sudden he will do so according to his fixed habit of 
mind. 

Fifthly and lastly, those who are acting under 
Ignorance have a show of Courage and are not very 
far from the Hopeful. But still they are inferior in- 
asmuch as they have no opinion of themselves ; which 
the others have and therefore stay and contest a field 
for some little time. But they who have been deceived 
fly the moment they know things to be otherwise than 
they supposed, which the Argives experienced when 
they fell on the Lacedaemonians taking them for the 
men of Sicyon. 10 

10 Sec Xenophon, Hell, iv, 10. In the battle of the 
Walls of Corinth (B.C. 392), the Spartan cavalry carried 
Sicyoiiian shields as a disguise. [i^n.] 



CHAP, xii ETHICS 85 

CHAPTER XII 

Additional Xotes upon Courage 

WE have described then what kind of men the 
Brave are, and what they who are thought to be, but 
are not really, Brave. 

It must be remarked, however, that though Courage 
is concerned with boldness and fear it is not concerned 
with both equally, but with fear much more than 
the former : for he that under pressure of these is 
undisturbed and stands related to them as he ought 
is better entitled to the name of Brave than he who 
is properly affected towards objects of confidence. 
So then men are termed Brave for withstanding 
painful things. 

It follows that Courage involves pain and is justly 
praised, since it is a harder matter to withstand things 
that are painful than to abstain from such as are 
pleasant. 

It must not be thought but that the End and object 
of Courage is pleasant, but it is obscured by the sur- 
rounding circumstances, as also in the gymnastic 
games. To boxers the End is pleasant with a view 
to which they act, I mean the crown and the honours ; 
but the receiving the blows they do is painful and 
annoying to flesh and blood, and so is all the labour 
they have to undergo ; and, a,s these drawbacks are 
many, the object in view being small appears to have 
no pleasantness in it. 

If then we may say the same of Courage, of course 
death and wounds must be painful to the Brave man 
and against his will : still he endures these because it 
is honourable so to do or because it is dishonourable 
not to do so. And the more complete his virtue and 
his happiness, so much the more will ho be pained at the 
notion of death : since to such a man as he is it is best- 
worth while to live, and ho with full consciousness 



86 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK m 

is deprived of the greatest goods by death, and this 
is a painful idea. But he is not the less Brave for 
feeling it to be so, nay rather it may be he is shown to 
be more so because ho chooses the honour that may 
be reaped in war in preference to retaining safe pos- 
session of these other goods. The fact is that to act 
with pleasure does not belong to all the Virtues, except 
so far as a man realizes the End of his actions. 

But there is perhaps no reason why not such men 
should make the best soldiers, but those who are less 
truly Brave but have no other good to care for, these 
being ready to meet danger and bartering their lives 
against small gain. 

Let thus much be accepted as sufficient on the sub- 
ject of Courage ; the true nature of which it is not 
difficult to gather, in outline at least, from what has 
been said. 



CHAPTER XIII 

Of Perfected Self-Mastery * 

NEXT let us speak of Perfected Self-Mastery, which 
seems to claim the next place to Courage, since these 
two are the Excellences of the Irrational part of the 
Soul. 

That it is a mean state, in respect of Pleasures, wo 
have already said (Pains being in fact its object- 
matter in a loss degree and dissimilar manner) ; the 
state of utter absence of self-control [i.e. Profligacy 
ED.] has plainly the same object-matter ; the next 
thing then is to determine what kind of Pleasures. 

Let Pleasures then be understood to be divided 
into mental and bodily, instances of the former being 
love of honour or of learning (it being plain that 



1 'Temperance' is the usual translation. See above, 
I, xi. [ED.] 



CHAP, xra ETHICS 87 

each man takes pleasure in that of these two objects 
which he has a tendency to like, his body being no 
way effected but rather his intellect). Now men are 
not called perfectly self-mastering or wholly destitute 
of self-control in respect of pleasures of this class : 
nor in fact in respect of any which are not bodily ; 
those for example who love to tell long stories, and 
are prosy, and spend their days about mere chance 
matters, we call gossips but not wholly destitute of 
self-control, nor again those who are pained at the 
loss of money or friends. 

It is bodily Pleasures then which are the object- 
matter of Perfected Self- Mastery, but not even all 
these indifferently : I mean, that they who take 
pleasure in objects perceived by the Sight, as colours, 
and forms, and painting, are not denominated men 
of Perfected Self -Mastery, or wholly destitute of self- 
control : and yet it would seem that one may take 
pleasure even in such objects, as one ought to do, or 
excessively, or too little. 

So too of objects perceived by the sense of Hearing ; 
no one applies the terms before quoted respectively to 
those who are excessively pleased with music or acting, 
or to those who take such pleasure as they ought. 

Nor again to those persons whose pleasure arises 
from the sense of Smell, except incidentally : I mean, 
we do not say men have no self-control because they 
take pleasure in the scent of fruit, or flowers, or in- 
cense, but rather when they do so in the smells of 
unguents and sauces : since men destitute of self- 
control take pleasure herein, because hereby the 
objects of their lusts are recalled to their imagination. 
You may also see other men take pleasure in the 
snir.ll of food when they are hungry ; but to take 
pleasure in such is a mark of the character before 
named since these are objects of desire to him. 

Now not even brutes receive pleasure in right of 
these senses, except incidentally. I mean, it is not 
the scent of hares' tlesh but the eating it which dotrs 



88 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK m 

take pleasure in, perception of which pleasure is caused 
by the sense of Smell. Or again, it is not the lowing 
of the ox but eating him which the lion likes ; but 
of the fact of his nearness the lion is made sensible 
by the lowing, and so he appears to take pleasure in 
this. In like manner, he has no pleasure in merely 
seeing or finding a stag or wild goat, but in the prospect 
of a meal. 

The habits of Perfect Self-Mastery and entire absence 
of self-control have then for their object-matter such 
pleasures as brutes also share in, for which reason 
they are plainly servile 2 and brutish : they are Touch 
and Taste. 

But even Taste men seem to make little or no use 
of ; for to the sense of Taste belongs the distinguishing 
of flavours ; what men do, in fact, who are testing 
the quality of wines or seasoning ' made dishes '. 

But men scarcely take pleasure at all in these 
things, at least those whom we call destitute of self- 
control do not, but only in the actual enjoyment 
which arises entirely from the sense of Touch, whether 
in eating or in drinking, or in grosser lusts. This 
accounts for the wish said to have been expressed 
once by a great glutton, ' that his throat had been 
formed longer than a crane's neck ', implying that his 
pleasure was derived from the Touch. 3 

The sense then with which is connected the habit 
of absence of self-control is the most common of all 
the senses, and this habit would seem to be justly a 
matter of reproach since it attaches to us not in so 
far as we are men but in so far as we are animals. 
Indeed it is brutish to take pleasure in such things 

" i.e. unworthy of the free, intelligent man ; the Greeks 
generally regarded slaves as naturally inferior. [ED.] 

y Tliis was Philoxenus, son of Eryxis, a favourite sub- 
ject of the comic poets. He used to take his own wino 
and condiments when he went out to dine. A kind of 
pio was called after him. [Eo.] 



CHAP, xni ETHICS 89 

and to like them best of all : for the most respectable 
of the pleasures arising from the touch have been set 
aside ; those, for instance, which occur in the course 
of gymnastic training from the rubbing and the warm 
bath : because the touch of the man destitute of self- 
control is not indifferently of any part of the body but 
only of particular parts. 

Now of lusts or desires some are thought to be 
universal, others peculiar and acquired ; thus desire 
for food is natural since every one who really needs 
desires also food, whether solid or liquid, or both ; 
and, as Homer says, the man in the prime of youth 
needs and desires intercourse with the other sex. But 
when we come to this or that particular kind, then 
neither is the desire universal, nor in all men is it 
directed to the same objects. And therefore the con- 
ceiving of such desires plainly attaches to us as indi- 
viduals. It must be admitted, however, that there 
is something natural in it : though different things 
are pleasant to different men, yet a preference of 
some particular objects to chance ones is universal. 
Well then, in the case of the desires which are strictly 
and properly natural few men go wrong and all in 
one direction, that is, on the side of too much : for 
example, to eat and drink of such food as happens to 
be on the table till one is overfilled is exceeding in 
quantity the natural limit, since the natural desire is 
simply a supply of a real deficiency. 

For this reason these men are called belly-mad, as 
filling it beyond what they ought, and it is the slavish 
who become of this character. 

But in respect of the peculiar pleasures many men 
go wrong and in many different ways ; for whereas 
the term ' fond of so and so ' implies either taking 
pleasure in wrong objects, or taking pleasure exces- 
sively, or as the mass of men do, or in a wTong way, 
they who are destitute of all self-control exceed in all 
these ways. That is to say, they take pleasure in 
some things in which they ought not to do so (because 



90 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK m 

they are properly objects of detestation), and in such 
as it is right to take pleasure in they do so more than 
they ought and the mass of men do. 

Well then, that excess with respect to pleasures is 
absence of self-control, and blameworthy, is plain. 
But viewing these habits on the side of pains, we 
find that a man is not said to have the virtue for 
withstanding them (as in the case of Courage), nor 
the vice for not withstanding them ; but the man 
destitute of self-control is such, because he is pained 
more than he ought to be at not obtaining things 
which are pleasant (and thus his pleasure produces 
pain to him), and the man of Perfected Self-Mastery 
is such in virtue of not being pained by their absence, 
that is, by having to abstain from what is pleasant. 

Now the man destitute of self-control desires either 
all pleasant things indiscriminately or those which are 
specially pleasant, and he is impelled by his desire 
to choose these tilings in preference to all others ; 
and this involves pain, not only when he misses the 
attainment of his objects, but in the very desiring 
them, since all desire is accompanied by pain. Surely 
it is a strange case this, being pained by reason of 
pleasure. 

As for men who are defective on the side of pleasure, 
who take loss pleasure in things than they ought, they 
are almost imaginary characters, because such absence 
of sensual perception is not natural to man. Even 
the other animals distinguish between different kinds 
of food, and like some kinds and dislike others. In 
fact, could a man be found who takes no pleasure in 
anything and to whom all things are alike, he would 
be far from being human at all : there is no name for 
such a character because it is simply imaginary. 

But the man of Perfected Self-Mastery is in the 
mean with respect to these objects : that is to say, he 
neither takes pleasures in the things which delight the 
vicious man, and in fact rather dislikes them, nor at 
all in improper objects ; nor to any great degree in 



CHAP, xrv ETHICS 91 

any object of the class : nor is he pained at their 
absence ; nor does he desire them ; or, if he does, 
only in moderation, and neither more than he ought, 
nor at improper times, and so forth : but such things 
as are conducive to health and good condition of body, 
being also pleasant, these he will desire in moderation 
and as he ought to do, and also such other pleasant 
things as do not hinder these objects, and are not 
unseemly or disproportionate to his means : because 
he that should grasp at such would be liking such 
pleasures more than is proper : but the Man of Per- 
fected Self-Mastery is not of this character, but regu- 
lates his desires by the dictates of right reason. 



CHAPTER XIV 

A comparison between Cowardice and absence of Self- 
Control [i.e. Profligacy ED.] and some further notes 
upon the latter, and the kindred virtue 

Now the vice of being destitute of all Self-Control 
seems to be more truly voluntary than Cowardice, 
because pleasure is the cause of the former and pain 
of the latter, and pleasure is an object of choice, pain 
of avoidance. And again, pain deranges and spoils 
the natural disposition of its victim, whe eas pleasure 
has no such effect. Profligacy, then, is more volun- 
tary, and therefore more justly open to reproach. 

It is so also for the following reason, that it is easier 
to be inured by habit to resist the objects of pleasure, 
there being many things of this kind in life and the 
process of habituation being unaccompanied by 
danger ; whereas the case is the reverse as regards 
the objects of fear. 

Again, Cowardice as a confirmed habit would seem 
to be voluntary in a different way from the particular 
instances which form the habit ; because it is painless 
in itself, but the occasions derange the man by reason 



92 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK ni 

of pain so that he throws away his arms and otherwise 
behaves himself unseemly, for which reason they are 
even thought by some to exercise a. power of com- 
pulsion. 

But to the man destitute of Self-Control the par- 
ticular instances are on the contrary quite voluntary, 
being done with desire and direct exertion of the will, 
but the general result is less voluntary : since no man 
desires to form the habit. 

The name of this vice (which signifies etymologically 
' unchastenedness') wo apply also to the faults of chil- 
dren, there being a certain resemblance between the 
cases : to which the name is primarily applied, and 
to which secondarily or derivatively, is not relevant 
to the present subject, but it is evident that the later 
in point of time must get the name from the earlier. 
And the metaphor seems to be a very good one ; for 
whatever grasps after base things, and is liable to 
great increase, ought to be chastened ; and to this 
description desire and the child answer most truly, 
in that children also live under the direction of desire 
and the grasping after what is pleasant is most promi- 
nently seen in these. 

Unless then the appetite bo obedient and subjected 
to the governing principle it will become very great ; 
for in the fool the grasping after what is pleasant is 
insatiable and undiscriminating ; and every satis- 
faction of the desire increases the kindred habit, and 
if the desires are great and violent in degree, they even 
expel Reason entirely. Therefore they ought to be 
moderate and few and in no respect to be opposed to 
Reason. Now when the appetite is in such a state, 
we denominate it obedient and chastened. 

In short, as the child ought to live with constant 
regard to the orders of its educator so should the 
appetitive principle with regard to those of Reason. 

So then in the man of Perfected Self-Mastery, the 
appetitive principle must bo accordant with Reason : 
for what is right is the mark at which both principles 



CHAP, xiv ETHICS 93 

aim. That is to say, the man of Perfected Self-Mastery 
desires what he ought in right manner and at right 
times, which is exactly what Reason directs. Let 
this be taken for our account of Perfected Self- 
Mastery. 



BOOK IV 
CHAPTER I 

Of Liberality 

WE will next speak of Liberality. Now this is 
thought to be the mean state, having for its object- 
matter Wealth ; I mean, the Liberal man is praised 
not in the circumstances of war, nor in those which 
constitute the character of perfected self-mastery, nor 
again in judicial decisions, but in respect of giving 
and receiving Wealth, chiefly the former. By the 
term Wealth I mean ' all those things whose worth is 
measured by money '. 

Now the states of excess and defect in regard of 
Wealth are respectively Prodigality and Stinginess : 
the latter of these terms we attach invariably to those 
who are over-careful about Wealth, but the former 
we apply sometimes with a complex notion ; that is 
to say, we give the name to the incontinent who 
spend money on the unrestrained gratification of their 
passions : and tliis is why they are thought to be most 
base, because they have many vices at once. 

It must be noted, however, that this is not a strict 
and proper use of the term, since its natural etymo- 
logical meaning is to denote him who has one par- 
ticular evil, viz. the wasting his substance : he is 
' unsaved ' (as the term literally denotes) who is 
wasting away by his own fault ; and this he really 
may be said to be ; the destruction of his substance 
is thought to be a kind of wasting of himself, since 
these things are the means of living. Well, this is 
our acceptation of the term Prodigality. 

Whatever things are for use may be used well or 
ill, and Wealth belongs to this class. He uses each 
particular thing best who has the virtue to whose 
province it belongs : so that he will use Wealth best 



CHAP, i ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS 95 

who has the virtue respecting Wealth, that is to say, 
the Liberal man. 

Expenditure and giving are thought to be the using 
of money, but receiving and keeping one would rather 
call the acquiring of it. And so the giving to proper 
persons is more characteristic of the Liberal man, 
than the receiving from proper quarters and forbear- 
ing to receive from the contrary. In fact general!}', 
doing well by others is more characteristic of virtue 
than being done well by, and doing things positively 
honourable than forbearing to do things dishonour- 
able ; and any one may see that the doing well by 
others and doing things positively honourable attaches 
to the act of giving, but to that of receiving only 
the being done well by or forbearing to do what is 
dishonourable. 

Besides, thanks are given to him who gives, not to 
him who merely forbears to receive, and praise even 
more. Again, forbearing to receive is easier than 
giving, the case of being too little freehanded with 
one's own being commoner than taking that which is 
not one's own. 

And again, it is they who give that are denominated 
Liberal, while they who forbear to receive are com- 
mended, not on the score of Liberality, but of just 
dealing, while for receiving men are not, in fact, praised 
at all. 

And the Liberal are liked almost best of all virtuous 
characters because they are profitable to others, and 
this their profitableness consists in their giving. 

Furthermore : all the actions done in accordance 
with virtue are honourable, and done from the motive 
of honour : and the Liberal man, therefore, will give 
from a motive of honour, and will give rightly ; 
I mean, to proper persons, in right proportion, at 
right times, and whatever is included in the term 
' right giving ' : and this too with positive pleasure, 
or at least without pain, since whatever is done in 
accordance with virtue is pleasant or at least not 



96 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK iv 

unpleasant, most certainly not attended with positive 
pain. 

But the man who gives to improper people, or not 
from a motive of honour, but from some other cause, 
shall be called not Liberal but something else. Neither 
shall he be so denominated who does it with pain : 
this being a sign that he would prefer his wealth to 
the honourable action, 1 and this is no part of the 
Liberal man's character ; neither will such an one 
receive from improper sources, because the so re- 
ceiving is not characteristic of one who values not 
wealth : nor again will he be apt to ask, because one 
who does kindnesses to others does not usually receive 
them willingly. But from proper sources (his own 
property, for instance) he will receive, doing this not 
as honourable but as necessary, that he may have 
somewhat to give : neither will he be careless of his 
own, since it is his wish through it to help others in 
need : nor will he give to chance people, that he may 
have wherewith to give to those to whom he ought, 
at right times, and on occasions when it is honourable 
so to do. 

Again, it is a trait in the Liberal man's character 
even to exceed very much in giving so as to leave too 
little for himself, it being characteristic of such an 
one not to have a thought of self. 

Now Liberality is a term, of relation to a man's 
means, for the Liberalness depends not on the amount 
of what is given but on the moral state of the giver 
who gives in proportion to his means. There is 
then no reason why he should not be the more Liberal 
man who gives the less amount, if he has less to give 
out of. 

Again, they are thought to be more Liberal who 
have inherited, not acquired for themselves, their 
means ; because, in the first place, they have never 

1 i.e. he would not give except to gain favour, reputa- 
tion, or some other quid pro quo. [Eo.] 



CHAP, i ETHICS 97 

experienced want, and next, all people love most 
their own works, just as parents do and poets. 

It is not easy for the Liberal man to be rich, since 
he is neither apt to receive nor to keep but to lavish, 
and values not wealth for its own sake but with a 
view to giving it away. Hence it is commonly charged 
upon fortune that they who most deserve to be rich 
are least so. Yet this happens reasonably enough ; 
it is impossible he should have wealth who does not 
take any care to have it, just as in any similar case. 

Yet he will not give to improper people, nor at 
wrong times, and so on : because he would not then 
be acting in accordance with Liberality, and, if he 
spent upon such objects, would have nothing to spend 
on those on which he ought. For, as I have said 
before, he is Literal who spends in proportion to his 
means, and on proper objects, while he who does so 
in excess is prodigal (this is the reason why we never 
call despots prodigal, because it does not seem to be 
easy for them by their gifts and expenditure to go 
beyond their immense possessions). 

To sum up then. Since Liberality is a mean state 
in respect of the giving and receiving of wealth, the 
Literal man will give and spend on proper objects, 
and in proper proportion, in great tilings and in small 
alike, and all this with pleasure to himself ; also he 
will receive from right sources, and in right proportion. 
As the virtue is a mean state in respect of both, he 
will do both as he ought, and, in fact, upon proper 
giving follows the correspondent receiving, while that 
which is not such is contrary to it. Xow those which 
follow one another come to coexist in the same person ; 
those which are contraries plainly do not. 

Again, should it happen to him to spend money 
beyond what is needful, or otherwise than is well, 
he will be vexed, but only moderately and as he ought ; 
for feeling pleasure and pain at right objects, and in 
right manner, is a property of Virtue. 

The Literal man is also easv to deal with in financial 



98 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK iv 

matters ; for he can easily be wronged, since he values 
not wealth, and is more vexed at not spending where 
he ought to have done so than at spending where he 
ought not, and he relishes 2 not the maxim of Simon- 
ides. 



Of the Extremes 

BUT the Prodigal man goes wrong also in these 
points, for he is neither pleased nor pained at proper 
objects or in proper manner, which will become more 
plain as we proceed. 

We have said already that Prodigality and Stingi- 
ness are respectively states of excess and defect, and 
this in two things, giving and receiving (expenditure 
of course wo class under giving). Well now, Prodi- 
gality exceeds in giving and forbearing to receive and 
is deficient in receiving ; while Stinginess is deficient 
in giving and exceeds in receiving, but it is in small 
tilings. 

The two parts of Prodigality, to be sure, do not 
commonly go together ; it is not easy, I mean, to give 
to all if you receive from none, because private indi- 
viduals thus giving will soon find their means run 
short, and such are in fact thought to be prodigal. 
He that should combine both would seem to be no 
little superior to the Stingy man : for he may be 
easily cured, both by advancing in years, and also by 
the want of means, and he may come thus to the mean : 
he has, you see, already the essentials of the Liberal 
man, he gives and forbears to receive, only he does 
neither in right manner or well : so if he could be 

2 Or ' would not please Simonidos '. The text is un- 
certain. Sayings in praise of wealth are attributed to 
Siinonides [Eo.J 



CHAP, n ETHICS 99 

wrought upon by habituation in this respect, or change 
in any other way, he would be a real Liberal man, for 
he will give to those to whom he should, and will 
forbear to receive whence he ought not. This is the 
reason too why he is thought not to be low in moral 
character, because to exceed in giving and in for- 
bearing to receive is no sign of badness or meanness, 
but only of folly. 

Well then, he who is Prodigal in this fashion is 
thought far superior to the Stingy man for the afore- 
mentioned reasons, and also because he does good 
to many ; but the Stingy man to no one, not even to 
himself. But most Prodigals, as has been said, com- 
bine with their other faults that of receiving from 
improper sources, and on this point are Stingy. For 
they become grasping, because they wish to spend 
and cannot do this easily, since their means soon run 
short and they are then necessitated to get from some 
other quarter : and then again, because they care 
not for what is honourable, they receive recklessly, 
and from all sources indifferently, because they desire 
to give but care not how or whence. 

And for this reason their givings are not Liberal, 
inasmuch as they are not .honourable, nor purely 
disinterested, nor done in right fashion ; but they 
oftentimes make those rich who should be poor, and 
to those who are quiet and respectable persons 
they will give nothing, but to flatterers, or those who 
subserve their pleasures in any way, they will give 
much. And therefore most of them are profligates ; 
for as they are open-handed they are liberal in ex- 
penditure upon the unrestrained gratification of their 
passions, and turn oil to their pleasures because they 
do not live with reference to what is honourable. 

Thus then the Prodigal, if ungraded, slides into 
these faults ; but if he could get care bestowed on 
him he might come to the mean and to what is right. 

Stinginess, on the contrary, is incurable : old age, 
for instance, and incapacity of any kind, is thought 



100 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK iv 

to make people Stingy ; it is more congenial to human 
nature than Prodigality, the mass of men being fond 
of money rather than apt to give : moreover it extends 
far and has many phases, the modes of stinginess being 
many. For as it consists of two things, defect of 
giving and excess of receiving, everybody does not 
have it entire, but it is sometimes divided, and one 
class of persons exceed in receiving, the other are 
deficient in giving. I mean those who are design- 
nated by such appellations as sparing, close-fisted, 
niggards, are all deficient in giving ; but other men's 
property they neither desire nor are willing to receive, 
in some instances from a real moderation and shrinking 
from what is base. 

There are some people whose motive, either sup- 
posed or alleged, for keeping their property is this, 
that they may never be driven to do anything dis- 
honourable : to this class belongs the skinflint, 1 and 
every one of similar character, so named from the 
excess of not-giving. Others again decline to receive 
their neighbour's goods from a motive of fear ; their 
notion being that it is not easy to take other people's 
things yourself without their taking yours : so they 
are content neither to receive nor to give. 

The other class again who are stingy in respect of 
receiving exceed in that they receive anything from 
any source ; such as they who work at illiberal em- 
ployments, brothel keepers, and such like, and usurers 
who lend small sums at largo interest : for all these 
receive from improper sources, and improper amounts. 
Their common characteristic is base-gaining, since 
they all submit to disgrace for the sake of gain and 
that small ; because those who receive great things 
neither whence they ought, nor what they ought (as 
for instance despots who sack cities and plunder 
temples), we denominate wicked, impious, and un- 
just, but not Stingy. 

1 Literally ' cummin-splitter '. [Eo.] 



CHAP, m ETHICS 101 

Now the dicer and bath-plunderer 2 and the robber 
belong to the class of the Stingy, for they are given 
to base gain : both busy themselves and submit to 
disgrace for the sake of gain, and the one class incur 
the greatest dangers for the sake of their booty, while 
the others make gain of their friends to whom they 
ought to be giving. 

So both classes, as wishing to make gain from im- 
proper sources, are given to base gain, and all such 
receivings are Stingy. And with good reason is 
Stinginess called the contrary of Liberality : both 
because it is a greater evil than Prodigality, and 
because men err rather in this direction than in what 
we have spoken of as Prodigality. 

Let this be considered as what we have to say 
respecting Liberality and the contrary vices. 



CHAPTER III 

Of Magnificence 

NEXT in order would seem to come a dissertation 
on Magnificence, this being thought to be, like liberal- 
ity, a virtue having for its object-matter Wealth ; 
but it does not, like that, extend to all transactions 
in respect of Wealth, but only applies to such as are 
expensive, and in these circumstances it exceeds 
liberality in respect of magnitude, because it is (what 
the very name in Greek hints at) fitting expense on a 
large scale. This term is of course relative : I mean, 
the expenditure of equipping and commanding a 
trireme is not the same as that of providing for a 
sacred embassy l : ' fitting ' of course also is relative 

2 The thief who stole the clothes of people who were 
bathing in the public baths. [Ei)-l 

1 i.e. an embassy to represent the State at the Olympic 
Games, or to make inquiry of an Oracle on behalf of the 
State. [Eo.] 



102 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK iv 

to the individual, and the matter wherein and upon 
which he has to spend. And a man is not denominated 
Magnificent for spending as he should do in small or 
ordinary things, as, for instance, 

' Oft to the wandering beggar did I give.' (Od. xvii, 420.) 

but for doing so in great matters : that is to say. 
the Magnificent man is liberal, but the liberal is not 
thereby Magnificent. The falling short of such a 
state is called Meanness, the exceeding it Vulgar 
Profusion, Want of Taste, and so on ; which are 
faulty, not because they are on an excessive scale in 
respect of right objects but, because they show off 
in improper objects, and in improper manner : of 
these we will speak presently. The Magnificent man 
is like a man of skill, because he can see what is fitting, 
and can spend largely in good taste ; for, as we said 
at the commencement, the confirmed habit is deter- 
mined by the separate acts of working, and by its 
object-matter. 

Well, the expenses of the Magnificent man are great 
and fitting : such also are his works (because this 
secures the expenditure being not great merely, but 
befitting the work). So then the work is to be pro- 
portionate to the expense, and this again to the work, 
or even above it : and the Magnificent man will incur 
such expenses from the motive of honour, this being 
common to all the virtues, and besides he will do it 
with pleasure and lavishly ; excessive accuracy in 
calculation being Mean. He will consider also how 
a thing may bo done most beautifully and fittingly, 
rather, than for how much it may be dene, and how 
at the least expense. 

So the Magnificent man must be also a liberal man, 
because the liberal man will also spend what ho ought, 
and in right manner ; but it is the Great, that is to 
say the large, scale, which is distinctive of the Magnifi- 
cent man, the object-matter of liberality being the 
same, and without spending more money than another 



OHAP. ni ETHICS 103 

man he will make the work more magnificent. I mean, 
the excellence of a possession and of a work is not 
the same : as a piece of property that tiling is most 
valuable which is worth most, gold for instance ; but 
as a work that which is great and beautiful, because 
the contemplation of such an object is admirable, and 
so is that which is Magnificent. So the excellence of 
a work on a large scale is Magnificence. There are 
cases of expenditure which we call honourable, such 
as are dedicatory offerings to the gods, and the fur- 
nishing their temples, and sacrifices, and in like manner 
everything that has reference to the Deity, and all 
such public matters as are objects of honourable am- 
bition, as when men think in any case that it is their 
duty to furnish a chorus for the stage splendidly, or 
fit out and maintain a trireme, or give a general public 
feast. 

Now in all these, as has been already stated, respect 
is had also to the rank and the means of the man who 
is doing them : because they should be proportionate 
to these, and befit not the work only but also the 
doer of the work. For this reason a poor man cannot 
be a Magnificent man, since he has not means where- 
with to spend largely and yet becomingly ; and if he 
attempts it he is a fool, inasmuch as it is out of pro- 
portion and contrary to propriety, whereas, to be in 
accordance with virtue, a tiling must be done rightly. 

Such expenditure is fitting moreover for those to 
whom such things previously belong, either through 
themselves or through their ancestors or people with 
whom they are connected, and to the high-born or 
people of high repute, and so on : because all these 
things imply greatness and reputation. 

So then the Magnificent man is pretty much as I 
have described him, and Magnificence consist? in such 
expenditures : because they are the greatest and most 
honourable : and of private ones such as come but 
once for all, marriage to wit, and things of that kind ; 
and any occasion which engages the interest of the 



104 t ARISTOTLE'S BOOK TV. 

community in general, or of those who are in power : 
e.g. what concerns receiving and despatching stran- 
gers, and gifts, and repaying gifts : because the Mag- 
nificent man is not apt to spend upon himself but on 
the public good, and gifts are pretty much in the 
same case as dedicatory offerings. 

It is a characteristic also of the Magnificent man to 
furnish his house suitably to his wealth, for this also 
is a kind of ornament : and, again, to spend rather 
upon such works as are of long duration, these being 
most honourable. And again, propriety in each case, 
because the same things are not suitable to gods and 
men, nor in a temple and a tomb. And again, in the 
case of expenditures, each must be great of its kind, 
and great expense on a groat object is most magni- 
ficent, that is in any case what is groat in these par- 
ticular things. 

There is a difference too between greatness of a 
work and greatness of expenditure : for instance, the 
most beautiful ball or cup is magnificent as a present 
to a child, while the price of it is small and almost 
mean. Therefore it is characteristic of the Magni- 
ficent man to do magnificently whatever he is about : 
for whatever is of this kind cannot be Ccasily surpassed, 
and bears a proper proportion to the expenditure. 

Such then is the Magnificent man. 

The man who is in the state of excess, called one 
of Vulgar Profusion, is in excess because he spends 
improperly, as has been said. I mean in cases re- 
quiring small expenditure he lavishes much and shows 
off out of taste ; giving his club a feast fit for a wedding- 
party, or if he has to furnish a chorus for a comedy, 
giving the actors purple to wear in the first scene, as 
did the Megariaris. 2 And all such tilings he will do, 
not with a view to that which is really honourable, 
but to display his wealth, and because ho thinks he 



2 The Athenians regarded Megp.rian comedy as pre- 
tentious aud common. [Eo.J 



cn.vp. iv ETHICS 105 

shall be admired for these things ; and he will spend 
little where he ought to spend much, and much where 
he should spend little. 

The Mean man will be deficient in every case, and 
even where he has spent the most he will spoil the 
whole effect for want of some trifle ; he is procrasti- 
nating in all he does, and contrives how he may spend 
the least, and does even that with lamentations about 
the expense, and thinking that ho does all things on 
a greater scale than ho ought. 

Of course, both these states are faulty, but they do 
not involve disgrace because they are neither hurtful 
to others nor very unseemly. 



CHAPTER IV 
Of Great-mindedness, 1 Magnanimity 

THE very name of Great-mindedness impb'es, that 
great things are its object-matter ; and we will first 
settle what kind of things. It makes no difference, 
of course, whether we regard the moral state in the 
abstract or as exemplified in an individual. 

Well then, he is thought to be Great-minded who 
values himself highly [or ' claims much ' ED.] and 
at the same time justly, because he that does so with- 
out grounds is foolish, and no virtuous character is 
foolish or senseless. Well, the character I have de- 
scribed is Great-minded. The man who estimates 
himself lowly, and at the same time justly, is modest ; 
but not Great-minded, since this latter quality implies 
greatness, just as beauty implies a large bodily con- 
formation while small people are neat and well made 
but not beautiful. 



* Better ' High-mindedness ', ' Pride ' (or ' Proper 
Pride '), or even ' Self -respect '. The phrase \s very hard 
to translate. [Eix] 



106 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK rv 

Again, he who values himself highly without just 
grounds is a Vain man : though the name must not 
be applied to every case of unduly high self-estimation. 
He that values himself below his real worth is Small- 
minded, and whether that worth is great, moderate, 
or small, his own estimate falls below it. And he is 
the strongest case of this error who is really a man 
of great worth, for what would he have done had his 
worth been less ? 

The Great-minded man is then, as far as greatness 
is concerned, at the summit, but in respect of pro- 
priety he is in the mean, because he estimates himself 
at his real value (the other characters respectively 
are in excess and defect). Since then he justly esti- 
mates himself at a high, or rather at the highest pos- 
sible, rate, his character will have respect specially 
to one thing : this term ' rate ' has reference of 
course to external goods : and of these we should 
assume that to be the greatest which we attribute to 
the gods, and which is the special object of desire to 
those who are in power, and which is the prize pro- 
posed to the most honourable actions : now honour 
answers to these descriptions, being the greatest of 
external goods. So the Great-minded man boars him- 
self as ho ought in respect of honour and dishonour. 
In fact, without need of words, the Great-minded 
plainly have honour for their object-matter : since 
honour is what the great consider themselves specially 
worthy of, and rightly. 

The Small-rnincled man is deficient, both as regards 
himself, and also as regards the estimation of tho 
Great-minded : while the Vain man is in excess as 
regards himself, but does not got beyond tho Great- 
minded man. Now the Great-minded man, being by 
the hypothesis worthy of tho greatest things, must 
be of the highest excellence, since the better a man 
is the more is he worth, and he who is best is worth 
the most : it follows then, that to be truly Great- 
miudod a man must be good, and whatever is great 



CHAP, rv ETHICS 107 

in each virtue would seem to belong to the Great- 
minded. It would no way correspond with the char- 
acter of the Great-minded to flee spreading his hands 
all abroad 2 ; nor to injure any one ; for with what 
object in view will he do what is base, in whose eyes 
nothing is of great account ? in short, if one were to 
go into particulars, the Great-minded man would show 
quite ludicrously unless he were a good man : ho 
would not be in fact deserving of honour if he were a 
bad man, honour being the prize of virtue and given 
to the good. 

This virtue, then, of Great -mindedness seems to 
be a kind of ornament of all the other virtues, in 
that it makes them better and cannot be without 
them ; and for this reason it is a hard matter to be 
really and truly Great-minded : for it cannot be with- 
out thorough goodness and nobleness of character. 

Honour then and dishonour are specially the sphere 
of the Great-minded man : and at such as is great, 
and given by good men, ho will be pleased moderately 
as getting his own, or perhaps somewhat less for no 
honour can bo quite adequate to perfect virtue : but 
still he will accept this because they have nothing 
higher to give him. But such as is given by ordinary 
people and on trifling grounds he will entirely despise, 
because these do not come up to his deserts ; and dis- 
honour likewise, because in his case there cannot be 
just ground for it. 

Now though, as I have said, honour is specially 
the sphere of the Groat-minded man, I do not mean 
but that likewise in respect of wealth and power, and 
good or bad fortune of every kind, he will bear him- 
self with moderation, fall out how they may, and 
neither in prosperity will ho bo overjoyed nor in 



" From this, and other similar phnws, somo (e.g. 
Burnct) have concluded that Aristotle is speaking humor- 
ously of a popular ideal, and that his own ideal is to be 
sought in Book x. [Eo.J 



108 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK iv 

adversity will lie bo unduly pained. For not even 
in respect of honour does he so bear himself ; and 
yet it is the greatest of all such objects, since it is the 
cause of power and wealth being choiceworthy, for 
certainly they who have them desire to receive honour 
through them. So to whom honour even is a small 
thing, to him will all other things also be so ; and 
this is why such men are thought to be supercilious. 

It seems too that pieces of good fortune contribute 
to form this character of Great-mindedness : I mean 
the nobly born, or men of influence, or the wealthy, 
are considered to bo entitled to honour, for they are 
in a position of eminence and whatever is eminent in 
respect of goodness is more entitled to honour, and 
this is why such circumstances dispose men rather to 
Great-mindedness, because they receive honour at 
the hands of some men. 

Now really and truly the good man alone is entitled 
to honour ; only if a man unites in himself goodness 
with those external advantages is he thought to be 
more entitled to honour : but they who have them 
without also having virtue are not justified in their 
high estimate of themselves, nor are they rightly 
denominated Great-minded ; since perfect virtue is 
indispensable to such a character. 

Further, such mon become supercilious and insolent, 
it not being easy to boar prosperity well without 
goodness ; and not being able to bear it, and pos- 
sessed with an idea of their own superiority to others, 
they despise them, and do just whatever their fancy 
prompts ; for they mimic the Great-minded man, 
though they are not like him, and they do this in 
such points as they can, so that without doing the 
actions which can only flow from real goodness they 
despise others. Whereas the Great-minded man de- 
spises on good grounds (for he forms his opinions 
truly), but the mass of men do it at random. 

Moreover, he is not a man to incur little risks, 
nor does ho court danger, because there are but few 



CHAP, iv ETHICS 109 

things ho has a value for ; but he will incur great 
dangers, and when he does venture he is prodigal of 
his life as knowing that there are terms on which it 
is not worth his while to live. He is the sort of man 
to do kindnesses, but he is ashamed to receive them ; 
the former putting a man in the position of superiority, 
the latter in that' of inferiority ; accordingly he will 
greatly overpay any kindness done to him, because 
the original actor will thus be laid under obligation 
and be in the position of the party benefited. Such 
men seem likewise to remember those they have done 
kindnesses to, but not those from whom they have 
received them, because he who has received is in- 
ferior to him who has done the kindness, and our 
friend wishes to be superior ; accordingly he is pleased 
to hear of his own kind acts but not of those done to 
himself (and this is why, in Homer, Thetis 3 does not 
mention to Jupiter the kindnesses she had done him, 
nor did the Lacedaemonians to the Athenians but only 
the benefits received by Sparta). 

Further, it is characteristic of the Great-minded 
man to ask favours not at all, or very reluctantly, but 
to do a service very readily ; and to bear himself 
loftily towards the great or fortunate, but towards 
people of middle station affably ; because to be above 
the former is difficult and so a grand thing, but to be 
above the latter is easy ; and to be high and mighty 
towards the former is not ignoble, but to do it towards 
those of humble station would be low and vulgar ; it 
would be like parading strength against the weak. 

And again, he will not put himself in the way of 
honour, nor go where others are the chief men ; and 
be slack and dilatory, except in the case of some 
great honour or work ; he will be concerned in few 
things, and those great and famous. It is a property 
of him also to be open, both in his dislikes and his 
likings, because concealment is a consequent of fear. 

3 Iliad i, 3<J4, 503. [ED.] 



110 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK iv 

Likewise to be careful for reality rather than ap- 
pearance, and talk and act openly (for his contempt 
for others makes him a bold man, for which same 
reason he is apt to speak the truth, except where the 
principle of reserve comes in), but to be reserved 
towards the generality of men. 4 

And to bo unable to live with reference to any 
other but a friend ; because doing so is servile, as 
may be seen in that all flatterers are low and men in 
low estate are flatterers. Neither is his admiration 
easily excited, because nothing is great in his eyes ; 
nor does he bear malice, since remembering any thing, 
and specially wrongs, is no part of Great-mindedness, 
but rather overlooking them ; nor does he talk of 
other men ; in fact, he will not speak either of him- 
self or of any other ; he neither cares to be praised 
himself nor to have others blamed ; nor again does 
he praise freely, and for this reason he is not apt to 
speak ill even of his enemies except to show contempt. 

And he is by no means apt to make laments about 
things which cannot be helped, or requests about those 
which are trivial ; because to be thus disposed with 
respect to these things is consequent only upon real 
anxiety about them. Again, he is the kind of man 
to acquire what is beautiful and unprofitable rather 
than what is productive and profitable : this being 
rather the part of an independent man. 

Also slow motion, deep-toned voice, and deliberate 
style of speech, are thought to be characteristic of 
the Great-minded man : for he who is earnest about 
few things is not likely to be in a hurry, nor he who 
esteems nothing great to be very intent : and sharp 
tones and quickness are the result of these. 

4 This means a certain mock humility, as when a superior 
player ironically asks for odds in a game. The sense is 
clear, though the text is uncertain. [Eo.] 



CHAP, v ETHICS 111 

CHAPTER V 

Of the Extremes 

THIS then is the Great-minded man ; and ho who 
is in the defect is a Small-minded man, he who is in 
the excess a Vain man. However, as we observed in 
respect of the last character wo discussed, these ex- 
tremes are not thought to be vicious exactly, but 
only mistaken, for they do no harm. 

The Small-minded man, for instance, being really 
worthy of good, deprives himself of his deserts, and 
seems to lack something from net having a sufficiently 
high estimate of his own desert, in fact from self- 
ignorance : because, but for this, he would have 
grasped after what he really is entitled to, and that 
is good. Still such characters are not thought to 
be foolish, but rather shy. But the having such an 
opinion of themselves seems to have a deteriorating 
effect on the character : because in all cases men's 
aims are regulated by their supposed desert, and thus 
these men, under a notion of their own want of desert, 
stand aloof from honourable actions and courses, and 
similarly from external goods. 

But the Vain are foolish as well as self-ignorant, 
and that palpably : because they attempt honourable 
things, as though they were worthy, and then they 
are detected. They also set themselves off, by dress, 
and carriage, and such like things, and desire that 
their good circumstances may be seen, and they talk 
of them under the notion of receiving honour thereby. 
Small-mindedness rather than Vanity is opposed to 
Great-mindedness, because it is more commonly met 
with and is worse. 



112 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK TV 

CHAPTER VI 

Of Love of Honour 

WELL, the virtue of Great-mindedness has for its 
object great Honour, as we have said : and there 
seems to be a virtue having Honour also for its object 
(as we stated in the former book), which may seem 
to bear to Great-mindedness the same relation that 
Liberality does to Magnificence that is, both these 
virtues stand aloof from what is great but dispose us 
as we ought to be disposed towards moderate and 
small matters. Further : as in giving and receiving 
of wealth there is a mean state, an excess, and a defect, 
so likewise in grasping after Honour there is the more 
or less than is right, and also the doing so from right 
sources and in right manner. 

For we blame the lover of Honour [i.e. ambitious, 
in the bad sense ED.] as aiming at Honour more 
than he ought, and from wrong sources ; and him 
who is destitute of a love of Honour, as not choosing 
to be honoured even for what is noble. Sometimes 
again we praise the lover of Honour, [i.e. ambitious, in 
the good sense ED.] as manly and having a love for 
what is noble, and him who has no love for it as being 
moderate and modest (as we noticed also in the former 
discussion of these virtues). 

It is clear then that since ' Lover of so and so ' is 
a term capable of several meanings, we do not always 
denote the same quality by the term ' Lover of Hon- 
our ' ; but when we use it as a term of commendation 
wo denote more than the mass of men are ; when for 
blame more than a man should bo. 

And the mean state having no proper name the 
extremes seem to dispute for it as unoccupied ground : 
but of course where there is excess and defect there 
must be also the mean. And in point of fact, men 
do grasp at Honour more than they should, and less, 



CHAP, vii ETHICS 113 

and sometimes just as they ought 1 ; for instance, 
this state is praised, being a mean state in regard of 
Honour, but without any appropriate name. Com- 
pared with what is called Ambition it shows like a 
want of love for Honour, and compared with this it 
shows like Ambition, or compared with both, like 
both faults : nor is this a singular case among the 
virtues. Here the extreme characters appear to be 
mutually opposed, because the mean has no name 
appropriated to it. 



CHAPTER VII 
Of Gentleness 1 

GKSTLEXESS is a mean state, having for its object- 
matter Anger : and as the character in the mean has 
no name, and we may almost say the same of the 
extremes, we give the name of Gentleness (leaning 
rather to the defect, which has no name either) to the 
character in the mean. 

The excess may be called an over-aptness to Anger : 
for the passion is Anger, and the producing causes 
many and various. Now he who is angry at what 
and with whom he ought, and further, in right manner 
and time, and for proper length of time, is praised, 
so this Man will be Gentle since Gentleness is praised. 
For the notion represented by the term ' Gentle man ' 
is the being imperturbable, and not being led away 
by passion, but being angry in that manner, and at 
those things, and for that length of time, which Reason 
may direct. This character however is thought to 
err rather on the side of defect, inasmuch as he is 
not apt to take revenge but rather to make allowances 

1 Or, with a variant reading, ' therefore, it must be 
possible to find a mean '. [Ei>-] 

1 Or ' Good Temper ', ' Patience ', ' Serenity '. [Eo.] 



'..V 



114 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK rtr 

and forgive. And the defect, call it Angerlessness or 
what you will, is blamed : I mean, they who are not 
angry at things at which they ought to be angry are 
thought to be foolish, and they who are angry not in 
right manner, nor in right time, nor with those with 
whom they ought ; for a man who labours under this 
defect is thought to have no perception, nor to be 
pained, and to have no spirit to avenge himself, in- 
asmuch as he feels no anger : now to bear with insult 
to one's self, and patiently see one's own friends suffer 
it, is a slavish thing. 

As for the excess, it occurs in all forms ; men are 
angry with those with whom, and at things with 
which, they ought not to be, and more than they 
ought, and too hastily, and for too great a length 
of time. I do not mean, however, that these are 
combined in any one person : that would in fact be 
impossible, because the evil destroys itself, and if it 
is developed in its full force it becomes unbearable. 

Now those whom we term the Passionate are soon 
angry, and with people with whom and at things at 
which they ought not, and in an excessive degree, but 
they soon cool again, which is the best point about 
them. And this results from their not repressing 
their anger, but repaying their enemies (in that they 
show their feelings by reason of their vehemence), 
and then they have done with it. 

The Choleric again are excessively vehement, and 
are angry at everything, and on every occasion ; 
whence comes their name. 

The Bitter-tempered [or ' sulky '] are bar.l to recon- 
cile and keep their anger for a long while, because they 
repress their feeling : but when they have revenged 
themselves then comes a lull ; for vengeance destroys 
anger by producing pleasure in lieu of pain. But 
sulky men, having no outlet for their temper, keep 
the weight on their minds : because, as it does not show 
itself, no one attempts to reason it away, and digest- 
ing anger within one's self takes time. Such men are 



CHAP, vii ETHICS 115: 

very great nuisances to themselves and to their best 
friends. 

Again, we call those Cross-grained who are angry 
at wrong objects, and in excessive degree, and for too 
long a time, and who are not appeased without ven- 
geance or at least punishing the offender. 

To Gentleness we oppose the excess rather than the 
defect, because it is of more common occurrence : for 
human nature is more disposed to take than to forego 
revenge. And the Cross-grained are the worst to 
live with. 

Now, from what has been here said, that is also 
plain which was said before. I mean, it is no easy 
matter to define how, and with what persons, and at 
what kind of things, and how long one ought to, be 
angry, and up to what point a person is right or is 
wrong. For he that transgresses the strict rule only 
a little, whether on the side of too much or too little, 
is not blamed : sometimes we praise those who are 
deficient in the feeling and call them Gentle, some- 
times we call the irritable Virile as being well qualified 
to rule. So it is not easy to lay down, in so many 
words, for what degree or kind of transgression a man 
is blameable : because the decision is in particulars, 
and rests therefore with the Moral Sense. Thus much, 
however, is plain, that the mean state is praiseworthy, 
in virtue of wliich we are angry with those with whom, 
and at those things with which, we ought to be angry, 
and in right manner, and so on ; while the excesses and 
defects are blameable, slightly so if only slight, more 
so if greater, and when considerable very blameable. 

It is clear, therefore, that the moan state is what 
we are to hold to. 

This then is to be taken as our account of the various 
moral states which have Anger for their object-matter. 



116 ARISTOTLE'S noon iv 

CHAPTER VIII 

Of Friendliness 

NEXT, as regards social intercourse, the interchange 
of words and acts, some men are thought to be Over- 
Complaisant who, with a view solely to giving pleasure, 
agree to everything and never oppose, but think their 
line is to give no pain to those they are thrown amongst : 
they, on the other hand, are called Cross and Con- 
tentious who take exactly the contrary line to these, 
and oppose in everything, and have no care at all 
whether they give pain or not. 

Now it is quite clear, of course, that the states I 
have named are blameable, and that the mean between 
them is praiseworthy, in virtue of which a man will 
let pass what he ought as he ought, and also will 
object in like manner. However, this state has no 
name appropriated, but it is most like Friendliness ; 
since the man who exhibits it is just the kind of man 
whom we would call the amiable friend, with the 
addition of strong earnest affection ; but then this 
is the very point in which it differs from Friendliness, 
that it is quite independent of any feeling or strong 
affection for those among whom the man mixes : 
I mean, that he takes everything as he ought, not 
from any feeling of love or hatred but simply because 
his natural disposition leads him to do so ; he will do 
it alike to those whom he does know and those whom 
he does not, and those with whom he is intimate and 
those with whom he is not ; only in each case as 
propriety requires, because it is not fitting to care 
alike for intimates and strangers, nor again to pain 
them alike. 

It has been stated in a general way that his social 
intercourse will be regulated by propriety, and his 
aim will bo to avoid giving pain and to contribute to 
pleasure, but with a constant reference to what is 
noble and fitting. 



CHAP, ix ETHICS 117 

His proper object-matter seems to be the pleasures 
and pains which arise out of social intercourse, but 
whenever it is not honourable or even hurtful to him 
to contribute to pleasure, in these instances he will 
run counter and prefer to give pain. 

Or if the things in question involve unseemliness 
to the doer, and this not inconsiderable, or any harm, 
whereas his opposition will cause some little pain, 
here he will not agree but will run counter. 

Again, he will regulate differently his intercourse 
with great men and with ordinary men, and with all 
people according to the knowledge he has of them ; 
and in like manner, taking in any other differences 
which may exist, giving to each his due, and in itself 
preferring to give pleasure and cautious not to give 
pain, but still guided by the results, I mean by what 
is noble and fitting, according as they preponderate. 

Again, he will inflict trifling pain with a view to 
consequent pleasure. 

Well, the man bearing the mean character is pretty 
well such as I have described him, but he has no 
specific name : of those who try to give pleasure, the 
man who simpty and disinterestedly tries to be agree- 
able is called Over-Complaisant, he who docs it with 
a view to secure some profit in the way of wealth, 
or those things which wealth may procure, is a Flat- 
terer : I have said before, that the man who is ' always 
non-content ' is Cross and Contentious. Here the 
extremes have the appearance of being opposed to 
one another, because the mean has no specific name. 

CHAPTER IX 

Of Truthfulness 

THE mean state which steers clear of Exaggeration J 
has pretty much the same object-matter as the last 
we described, and likewise has no technical name. 



More accurately, ' Boastfulnesa '. [E 



118 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK rr 

Still it may be as well to go over these states : 
because, in the first place, by a particular discussion 
of each we shall be better acquainted with the general 
subject of moral character, and next we shall be the 
more convinced that the virtues are mean states by 
seeing that this is universally the case. 

In respect then of living in society, those who carry 
on this intercourse with a view to pleasure and pain 
have been already spoken of ; we will now go on to 
speak of those who are True or False, alike in their 
words and deeds and in the claims which they advance. 
Now the Exaggerator is thought to have a tendency 
to lay claim to things reflecting credit on him, both 
when they do not belong to him at all and also in 
greater degree than that in which they really do : 
whereas the Reserved [literally ' ironical '] man, on the 
contrary, denies those which really belong to him or 
else depreciates them, while the mean character being 
a Plain-matter-of-fact person is Truthful in life and 
word, admitting the existence of what does really 
belong to him and making it neither greater nor less 
than the truth. 

It is possible of course to take any of these lines 
either with or without some further view : but in 
general men speak, and act, and live, each according 
to his particular character and disposition, unless 
indeed a man is acting from any special motive. 

Now since falsehood is in itself low and blameable, 
while truth is noble and praiseworthy, it follows that 
the Truthful man (who is also in the mean) is praise- 
worthy, and the two who depart from strict truth are 
both blameable, but especially the Exaggerator. 

We will now speak of each, arid first of the Truth- 
ful man : I call him Truthful, because we are not 
now meaning the man who is true in his business 
agreements nor in such matters as amount to justice 
or injustice (this would come within the province of 
a different virtue), but, in such as do not involve 
any such serious diil'erence as this, the man we are 



CHAP, ix ETHICS 119 

describing is true in life and word simply because he is 
in a certain moral state. 

And he that is such must be judged to be a good 
man : for he that has a love for Truth as such, and 
is guided by it in matters indifferent, will be so like- 
wise even more in such as are not indifferent ; for 
surely he will have a dread of falsehood as base, since 
he shunned it even in itself : and he that is of such 
a character is praiseworthy, yet he leans rather to 
that which is below the truth, this having an appear- 
ance of being in better taste because exaggerations 
are so annoying. 

As for the man who lays claim to things above what 
really belongs to him without any special motive, he 
is like a base man because he would not otherwise 
have taken pleasure in falsehood, but he shows as a 
fool rather than as a knave. But if a man does this 
with a special motive, suppose for honour or glory, as 
the Braggart does, then he is not so very blameworthy, 
but if, directly or indirectly, for pecuniary considera- 
tions, he is more unseemly. 

Xow the Braggart is such not by his power but by 
his deliberate purpose, that is to say, in virtue of his 
moral state, and because he is a man of a certain 
kind ; just as there are liars who take pleasure in false- 
hood for its own sake while others lie from a desire of 
glory or gain. They who exaggerate with a view to 
glory pretend to such qualities as are followed by 
praise or highest congratulation ; they who do it with 
a view to gain assume those which their neighbours can 
avail themelves of, and the absence of which can be 
concealed, as a man's being a skilful soothsayer or 
physician ; and accordingly most men pretend to such 
things and exaggerate in this direction, because the 
faults I have mentioned are in them. 

The Reserved [Ironical], who depreciate their own 
qualities, have the appearance of being more refined 
in their characters, because they are not thought to 
speak with a view to gain but to avoid parade : one 



120 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK iv 

very common trait in such characters is their dis- 
claiming qualities generally admired, as Socrates used 
to do. There are people who disclaim small things 
and things which they obviously have ; these are 
called Mock-modest and are contemptible. 

This very Reserve sometimes shows like Exaggera- 
tion ; take, for instance, the excessive plainness of 
dress affected by the Lacedaemonians : in fact, both 
excess and the extreme of deficiency partake of the 
nature of Exaggeration. But they who practise Re- 
serve in moderation, and in cases in which the truth 
is not very obvious and plain, give an impression of 
refinement. Here it is the Exaggerates (as being 
the worst character) who appears to be opposed to 
the Truthful man. 

CHAPTER X 
Of Jocularity 

NEXT, as life has its pauses and in them admits 
of pastime combined with Jocularity [Playfulness], 
it is thought that in this respect also there is a kind of 
fitting intercourse, and that rules may be prescribed 
as to the kind of things one should say and the manner 
of saying them ; and in respect of hearing likewise 
(and there will be a difference between the saying 
and hearing such and such things). It is plain that 
in regard to these things also there will be an excess 
and defect and a mean. 

Now they who exceed in the ridiculous are judged 
to be Buffoons and Vulgar, catching at a joke in any 
and every way and at any cost, and aiming rather 
at raising laughter than at saying what is seemly 
and at avoiding to pain the object of their wit. They, 
on the other hand who would not for the world make 
a joke themselves and are displeased with such as do 
are thought to bo Boorish and Stern. But they who 
arc Jocular in good taste are denominated ' men of a 



CHAP, x ETHICS 121 

pretty wit ', as being mentally agile. Such are thought 
to be, as one may say, motions of the moral character ; 
and as bodies are judged of by their motions so too 
are moral characters. 

Now as the ridiculous lies on the surface, and the 
majority of men take more pleasure than they ought 
in Jocularity and Jesting, the Buffoons too get this 
name of ' Ready-witted ', as if refined and gentleman- 
like ; but that they differ from these, and considerably 
too, is plain from what has been said. 

One quality which belongs to the mean state is 
Tact : it is characteristic of a man of Tact to say and 
listen to such things as are fit for a good man and a 
gentleman to say and listen to : for there are things 
which are becoming for such a one to say and listen 
to in the way of Jocularity, and there is a difference 
between the Jocularity of the Gentleman and that of 
the Vulgarian ; and again, between that of the edu- 
cated and uneducated man. This you may see from 
a comparison of the Old and New Comedy : in the 
former obscene talk made the fun ; in the latter it 
is rather innuendo l : and this is no slight difference a-s 
regards decency. 

Well then, are we to characterize him who jests 
well by his saving what is becoming a gentleman, 
or by his avoiding to pain the object of his wit, or 
even by his giving him pleasure ; or will not such a 
definition be vasrue.' 2 since different things are hateful 
and pleasant to different men ? 

1 This (generally accepted) rendering (which nowadays 
implies veiled impropriety) is surely out of harmony with 
the whole spirit of the argument ; Aristotle is distinguish- 
ing between broad, vulgar farce and a more subtle or 
intellectual type of humour. rEo.] 

2 J. S. Phillimore (Cl-*s*. R*v. Feb. lOOGi suggests an 
ingenious modification of the text here, according to 
which the translation runs: ''Or are we to conclude 
that seemly jesting is among the things we cannot define ? 
since . . .". [Eo.J 



122 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK iv 

Be this as it may, whatever he says, such things 
will he also listen to, and it is commonly held that 
a man will do what he will bear to hear. He will not 
then make any joke at all, because jesting is a species 
of scurrility and there are some points of scurrility 
forbidden by law ; it may be certain points of jesting 
should have been also so forbidden. So then the 
refined and gentlemanlike man will bear himself thus 
as being a law to himself. Such is the mean character, 
whether denominated the man of Tact or of Ready 
Wit. 

But the Buffoon cannot resist the ridiculous, sparing 
neither himself nor any one else so that he can but 
raise his laugh, saying things of such kind as no man 
of refinement would say and some which he would 
not even tolerate if said by others in his hearing. 

The Boorish man is for such intercourse wholly 
useless : inasmuch as, contributing nothing jocose of 
his own, ho is savage with all who do. 

Yet some pause and amusement in life are gene- 
rally judged to be indispensable. 

The three mean states which have been described 
do occur in life, and the object-matter of all is inter- 
change of words and deeds. They differ, in that one 
of them is concerned with truth, and the other two 
with the pleasurable : and of these two again, the 
one is conversant with the jocosities of life the other 
with all other points of social intercourse. 



CHAPTER XI 

Of Shame 

To speak of Shame as a Virtue is incorrect, because 
it is much more like a feeling than a trained faculty. 
It is denned, we know, to be ' a kind of fear of dis- 
grace ', and its effects are similar to those of the fear 
of danger, for they who feel Shame grow red and they 



CHAP, xi ETHICS 123 

who fear death turn pale. So both are evidently in 
a way physical, which is thought to be a mark of a 
feeling rather than a moral state. 

Moreover, it is a feeling not suitable to every age, 
but only to youth : we do think that the young 
should be Shame-faced, because since they live at the 
beck and call of emotion they do much that is wrong 
and Shame acts on them as a check. In fact, we 
praise such young men as are Shame-faced, but no 
one would ever praise an old man for being given to 
it, inasmuch as we hold that he ought not to do things 
which cause Shame ; for Shame, since it arises at low 
bad actions, does not at all belong to the good man, 
because such ought not to be done at all : nor does 
it make any difference to allege that some things are 
disgraceful really, others only because they are thought 
so ; for neither should be done, so that a man ought 
not to be in the position of feeling Shame. In truth, 
to bo such a man as to do anything disgraceful is 
the part of a faulty character. And for a man to be 
such that he would feel Shame if he should do any 
thing disgraceful, and to think that this constitutes 
him a good man, is absurd : because Shame is felt at 
voluntary actions only, and a good man will never 
voluntarily do what is base. 

True it is, that Shame may be good on a certain 
supposition, as ' if a man should do such things, he 
would feel Shame ' : but then the Virtues are good 
in themselves, and not merely in supposed cases. 
And, granted that impudence and the not being 
ashamed to do what is disgraceful is base, it does not 
the more follow that it is good for a man to do such 
things and feel Shame. 

Nor is Self-Control properly a Virtue, but a kind 
of mixed state : however, all about this shall be set 
forth in a future Book. l 

J Book vii 



BOOK V 

CHAPTER I 

Prefatory remarks. The different senses of Justice 
ascertained from those of Injustice 

Now the points for our enquiry in respect of Justice 
and Injustice are, what kind of actions are their 
object-matter, and what kind of a mean state Justice 
is, and between what points the Just is a mean. And 
our enquiry shall be, if 3^011 please, conducted in the 
same method as we have observed in the foregoing 
parts of this Treatise. 

We see then that all men mean by the term Justice 
a trained habit such that in consequence of it men 
have the capacity of doing what is just, and actually 
do it, and wish it 1 : similarly also with respect to 
Injustice, a trained habit such that in consequence of 
it men do unjustly and wish what is unjust: let us 
also be content then with these as a ground-work 
sketched out. 

I mention the two, because the same does not hold 
with regard to a trained habit as with regard to Sciences 
or Faculties : I mean that whereas it is thought that 
the same Faculty or Science embraces contraries, a 
trained habit will not : from health, for instance, not 
the contrary acts are done but the healthy ones only ; 
we say a man walks healthily when ho walks as the 
healthy man would. 

However, of the two contrary habits the one may 
be frequently known from the other, and oftentimes 
the habits from their subject-matter : if it be seen 
clearly what a good state of body is, then is it also 

1 Each term is important : to make up the character 
of Justice, meii must have the capacity, do the acts, and 
do them from deliberate choice. 
124 



CHAP, i ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS 125 

seen what a bad state is, and from the things which 
belong to a good state of body the good state itself 
is seen, and vice versa. If, for instance, the good 
state is firmness of flesh, it follows that the bad state 
is flabbiness of flesh ; and whatever causes firmness 
of flesh is connected with the good state. 

It follows moreover in general, 2 that if of two 
contrary terms the one is used in many senses so 
also will the other be ; as, for instance, if ' the Just ', 
then also ' the Unjust '. Now Justice and Injustice 
do seem to be used respectively in many senses, but, 
because the line of demarcation between these is very 
fine and minute, 3 it commonly escapes notice that 
they are thus used, and it is not plain and manifest 
as where the various significations of terms are widely 
different : for in these last the visible difference is 
great ; for instance, the word /cXeis is used equivocally 
to denote the bone which is under the neck of animals 
and the instrument with which people fasten doors. 

Let it be ascertained then in how many senses the 
term 'Unjust man' is used. Well, he who violates 
the law, and he who is a grasping man, and the un- 
equal [i.e. unfair] man, are all thought to be Unjust : 
and so manifestly the Just man will be, the man who 
acts according to law, and the equal man. ' The Just ' 
then will be the lawful and the equal, and ' the Unjust ' 
the unlawful and the unequal. 

Well, since the Unjust man is also a grasping 
man, he will be so, of course, with respect to good 
things, but not of every kind, only those which are the 

2 But not always. <pi\:ti>, for instance, has two senses 
' to love ' and ' to kiss ', nurelv but one. Topics i, ch. xiii, 5. 

3 Things are dfj.ui>r/.ia. which have only their name in 
common, being in themselves different. The 6/u.wwfj.la is 
close therefore when the difference though real is but 
slight. There is no English expression for G/.IWI v/mla, 
' equivocal ' being applied to a term and not to its various 
6itiificates. 



126 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

subject-matter of good and bad fortune and which 
are in themselves always good but not always to the 
individual. 4 Yet men pray for and pursue these 
things: this they should not do but pray that things 
which are in the abstract good may be so also to them, 
and choose what is good for themselves. 

But the Unjust man does not always choose actually 
the greater part, but even sometimes the less ; as in 
the case of things which are simply evil : still, since 
the less evil is thought to be in a manner a good and 
the grasping is after good, therefore even in this case 
he is thought to be a grasping man, i.e. one who strives 
for more good than fairly falls to his share : of course 
he is also an unequal man, this being an inclusive and 
common term. 



CHAPTER H 

Of Justice in that sense, in which it is coextensive 
with Virtue 

WE said that the violator of Law is Unjust, and 
the keeper of the Law Just : further, it is plain that 
all Lawful things are in a manner Just, because by 
Lawful we understand what have been defined by 
the legislative power, and each of these we say is 
Just. The Laws too give directions on all points, 
aiming either at the common good of all, or that of 
the best, or that of those in power (taking for the 
standard real goodness or adopting some other esti- 
mate) ; in one way we mean by Just, those things 
which are apt to produce and preserve happiness and 
its ingredients for the social community. 

Further, the Law commands the doing the deeds 
not only of the brave man (as not leaving the ranks, 
nor flying, nor throwing away one's arms), but those 

4 See Book i, ch. i. 



. n ETHICS 127 

also of the perfectly self-mastering man, as abstinence 
from adultery and wantonness ; and those of the 
patient man, as refraining from striking others or 
using abusive language : and in like manner in respect 
of the other virtues and vices commanding some 
things and forbidding others, rightly if it is a good 
law, in a way somewhat inferior if it is one extempo- 
rised. 

Now this Justice is in fact perfect Virtue, yet not 
simply so but as exercised towards one's neighbour : 
and for this reason Justice is thought oftentimes to 
be the best of the Virtues, and 

'neither Hesper nor the Morning-star 
So worthy of our admiration : ' 

and in a proverbial saying we express the same : 
' All virtue is in Justice comprehended.' 

And it is in a special sense perfect Virtue because it 
is the practice of perfect Virtue. And perfect it is 
because he that has it is able to practise his virtue 
towards his neighbour and not merely on himself ; 
I mean, there are many who can practise virtue in 
the regulation of their private affairs who are wholly 
unable to do it in transactions with their neighbour. 
And for this reason that saying of Bias is thought to be 
a good one : 

' Rule will show what a man is ;' 

for he who bears Rule is necessarily in contact with 
others, i.e. in a community. And for this same reason 
Justice alone of all the Virtues is thought to be a good 
to others, because it has immediate relation to some 
other person, inasmuch as the Just man does what is 
advantageous to another, either to his ruler or fellow- 
subject. Xow he is the basest of men who practises 



128 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK V 

vice not only in his own person l but towards his 
friends also ; but he the best who practises virtue 
not merely in his own person but towards his neigh- 
bour, for this is a matter of some difficulty. 

Justice in this sense is not a part of Virtue but is 
coextensive with Virtue ; nor is the Injustice which 
answers to it a part of Vice but coextensive with Vice. 
Now wherein Justice in this sense differs from Virtue 
appears from what has been said : it is the same 
really, but the point of view is not the same. In so 
far as it has respect to one's neighbour it is Justice, 
in so far as it is such and such a moral state it is simply 
Virtue. 



CHAPTER III 

That there is particular Injustice and therefore particular 
Justice 

BUT the object of our enquiry is Justice, in the 
sense in which it is a part of Virtue (for there is such 
a thing, as we commonly say), and likewise with 
respect to particular Injustice. And of the existence 
of this last the following consideration is a proof. 
There are many vices by practising which a man acts 
unjustly, of course, but does not grasp at more than 
his share of good ; if, for instance, by reason of coward- 
ice he throws away his shield, or by reason of ill -temper 
he uses abusive language, or by reason of stinginess 
does not give a friend pecuniary assistance ; but 
whenever he does a grasping action, though it is often 
in the way of none of these vices, certainly not in all 

1 A man habitually drunk in private is viewed by our 
law as confining his vice to himself, and the law therefore 
does not attempt to touch him : a religious hermit may 
be viewed as one who confines his virtues to his own 
person. 



CHAP, m ETHICS 129 

of them, still it is in the way of some vice or other 
(for we blame him), and in the way of Injustice. There 
is then some kind of Injustice distinct from that co- 
extensive with Vice and related to it as a part to a 
whole, and some ' Unjust ' related to that which is 
co-extensive with violation of the law as a part to a 
whole. 

Again, suppose one man seduces a man's wife with 
a view to gain and actually gets some advantage by 
it, l and another does the same from impulse of lust, 
at an expense of money and damage, this latter will 
be thought to be rather profligate than a grasping 
man, and the former Unjust but not profligate : now 
why ? plainly because of his gaining. 

Again, all other acts of Injustice we refer to some 
particular depravity, as, if a man commits adultery, 
to abandonment to his passions ; if he deserts his 
comrade, to cowardice ; if he strikes another, to anger : 
but if he gains by the act, to no other vice than to 
Injustice. 

Thus it is clear that there is a kind of Injustice 
different from and besides that which includes all 
Vice, having tue same name because the definition 
is in the same genus ; for both have their force in 
dealings with others, but the one acts upon honour, 
or wealth, or safety, or by whatever one name we 
can include all these things, and is actuated by pleasure 
attendant on gain, while the other acts upon all 
things which constitute the sphere of the good man's 
action. 



1 See the account of Sejauus and Livia. Tacitus, Annul. 
iv, 3. 



130 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

CHAPTER IV 

The Justice co-extensive with Virtue is dismissed from 
further consideration 

Now that there is more than one kind of Justice, 
and that there is one which is distinct from and be- 
sides that which is co- extensive with Virtue, is plain : 
we must next ascertain what it is, and what are its 
characteristics. 

Well, the Unjust has been divided into the unlawful 
and the unequal, and the Just accordingly into the 
lawful and the equal : the aforementioned Injustice 
is in the way of the unlawful. And as the unequal 
and the unlawful are not the same, but differing as 
part to whole (because all unlawful is unequal, but not 
all unequal unlawful), so the Unjust and the Injustice 
we are now in search of are not the same as. but 
other than, those before mentioned, the one being 
the parts, the other the wholes ; for this particular 
Injustice is a part of the Injustice co-extensive with 
Vice, and likewise this Justice of the Justice co-exten- 
sive with Virtue. So that what we have now to speak 
of is the particular Justice and Injustice, and likewise 
the particular Just and Unjust. 

Here then let us dismiss any further consideration 
of the Justice ranking as co-extensive with Virtue 
(being the practice of Virtue in all its bearings towards 
others), and of the co-relative Injustice (being simi- 
larly the practice of Vice). It is clear too, that we 
must separate off the Just and the Unjust involved in 
these : because one may pretty well say that most 
lawful things are those which naturally result in action 
from Virtue in its fullest sense, because the law enjoins 
the living in accordance with each Virtue and forbids 
living in accordance with each Vice. And the pro- 
ducing causes of Virtue in all its bearings are those 
enactments which have been made respecting education 
oi the citizen 



CHAP, v ETHICS 131 

By the way, as to individual education, in respect 
of which a man is simply good without reference to 
others, whether it is the province of the science of 
government or some other science we must determine 
at a future time : for it may be it is not the same 
thing to be a good man and a good citizen in every 
case. 1 



CHAPTER V 
The division of particular Justice into two species 

Now of the Particular Justice, and the Just in- 
volved in it, one species is that which is concerned 
in the distributions of honour, or wealth, or such 
other things as are to be shared among the members 
of the social community (because in these one man as 
compared with another may have either a fair or 
an unfair share), and the other is that which is Cor- 
rective in the various transactions between man and 
man. 

And of this latter there are two parts : because of 
transactions some are voluntary and some involun- 
tary ; voluntary, such as follow ; selling, buying, 
loan for consumption, bail, loan for use, deposit, 
hiring : and this class is called voluntary because the 
origination of these transactions is voluntary. 

1 There are two reasons why the characters are not 
necessarily coincident. He is a good citizen, who does 
his best to carry out the o\trei'a under which he lives, 
but this may be faulty, so therefore pro tanto is he. 

Aaain, it is sufficient, so far as the Community is con- 
cerned, that he does the farts of a good man : but for the 
perfection of his own individual character, he must do 
them virtuously. A man may move rightly in his social 
orbit, without revolving rightly on his own axis. 

[i.e. the perfect citizen and the perfect state are mutually 
essential. ED.] 



132 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

The involuntary again are either such as involve 
secrecy ; as theft, adultery, poisoning, pimping, kid- 
napping of slaves, assassination, false witness ; or 
accompanied with open violence, as insult, bonds, 
death, rape, maiming, foul language, slanderous 
abuse. 



CHAPTER VI 

That Distributive Justice implies four proportional 
terms 

WELL, the unjust man we have said is unfair, and 
the abstract 'Unjust' unfair: further, it is plain 
that there is some mean of the unfair, that is to say, 
the equal or exact half (because in whatever action 
there is the greater and the less there is also the equal 
i.e. the exact half). If then' the Unjust is unequal 
[or ' unfair '] the Just is equal [or ' fair '], which all 
must allow without further proof : and as the equal 
is a mean the Just must be also a mean. Now the 
equal implies two terms at least : it follows then 
that the Just is both a mean and equal, and these 
relatively to certain persons ; and, in so far as it is a 
moan, between certain things (that is, the greater 
and the less), and, so far as it is equal, between two, 
and in so far as it is just it is so to certain persons. 
The Just then must imply four terms at least, for 
those to which it is just are two, and the things are 
two. 

And there will be the same equality between the 
persons, as between the things : because as the latter 
are to one another so are the former : for if the persons 
are not equal they must not have equal shares ; in 
fact this is the very source of all the quarrelling and 
wrangling in the world, when either they who are 
equal have and get awarded to them things not equal, 



CHAP, vi ETHICS 133 

or being not equal get equal shares. Again, the 
necessity of this equality of ratios is shown by the 
common phrase ' according to rate V for all agree 
that the Just in distributions ought to be according 
to some rate : but what that rate is to be, all do not 
agree ; the democrats are for freedom, oligarchs for 
wealth, others for nobleness of birth, and the aristo- 
cratic party for virtue. 

The Just, then, is a certain proportionable thing. 
For proportion does not apply merely to number in 
the abstract, 2 but to number generally, since it is 
equality of ratio?, and implies four terms at least 
(that this is the case in discrete proportion is plain 
and obvious, but it is true also in continuous pro- 
portion, for this uses one term as two, and mentions 
it twice ; thus A : B : : B : C. B is thus repeated ; 
and so the proportionals are four) : and the Just 
likewise implies four terms at the least, and the ratio 
between the two pair of terms is the same, because the 
persons and the things are divided similarly. It will 
stand then thus, A : B : : C : D, and then aUernando 
A : C : : B : D, and then (supposing C and D to repre- 
sent the things) A - C : B ~D : : A : B. The distribu- 
tion in fact consisting in putting together these terms 
thus : and if they are put together so as to preserve 
this same ratio, the distribution puts them together 
justly. So then the joining together of the first and 
third and second and fourth proportionals is the Just 
in the distribution, and this Just is the mean relatively 
to that which violates the proportionate, for the 
proportionate is a mean and the Just is proportionate. 
Now mathematicians call this kind of proportion 
geometrical : for in geometrical proportion the sum 



1 Better, ' standard of merit '. [ED.] 

-By novaoiKus djitVus is meant numbers themselves, 
4, 20. 50, &c., by 6\fs dpi6.ij.bs these numbers exemplified, 
4 horses, 20 sheep, &c. 



134 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

of the first and the third is to the sum of the second 
and the fourth as the first to the second or the third 

to the fourth [i.e. ~---r~= ,. Ec.l Furthermore 

b d b + d 

this proportion is not continuous, because the person 
and the thing do not make up one term. 

The Just then is this proportionate, and the Un- 
just that which violates the proportionate ; and so 
there comes to be the greater and the less, which in 
fact is the case in actual transactions, because he who 
acts unjustly has the greater share and he who is 
treated unjustly has the less of what is good : but in 
the case of what is bad this is reversed, for the less 
evil compared with the greater comes to be reckoned 
for good, because the less evil is more choiceworthy than 
the greater, and what is choiceworthy is good, and the 
more so the greater good. 

This then is the one species of the Just. 



CHAPTER VH 

Of Corrective Justice 

AND the remaining one is the Corrective, which 
arises in voluntary as well as involuntary transactions. 
Now this Just has a different form from the afore- 
mentioned ; for that which is concerned in distri- 
bution of common property is always according to 
the aforementioned proportion : I mean that, if the 
division is made out of common property, the shares 
will bear the same proportion to one another as the 
original contributions did : and the Unjust which 
is opposite to this Just is that which violates the 
proportionate. 

But the Just which arises in transactions between 
men is fairness [lit. equality] in a certain sense, and the 



CHAP, vn ETHICS 135 

Unjust unfair, only not in the way of geometrical 
proportion but of arithmetical. 1 Because it makes 
no difference whether a robbery, for instance, is com- 
mitted by a good man on a ba<l or by a bad man on a 
good, nor whether a good or a bad man has committed 
adultery : the law looks only to the difference created 
by the injury and treats the men as previously 
equal, where the one does and the other suffers 
injury, or the one has done and the other suffered 
harm. And so this Unjust, being an inequality, 
:he judge endeavours to reduce to equality again, 
because really when the one party has been wounded 
and the other has struck him, or the one kills 
and the other dies, the suffering and the doing are 
divided into unequal shares ; well, the judge tries to 
restore equality by penalty, thereby taking from the 
gain. 

For these terms gain and loss are applied to these 
cases, though perhaps the term in some particular 
instance may not be strictly proper, as gain, for in- 
stance, to the man who has given a blow, and loss to 
him who has received it : still, when the suffering has 
been estimated, the one is called loss and the other 
gain. 

And so the equal is a mean between the more and 
the less, which represent gain and loss in contrary 
ways (I mean, that the more of good and the less of 
evil is gain, the less of good and the more of evil is 
loss) : between which the equal was stated to be a 
mean, which equal we say is Just : and so the Cor- 
rective Just must be the mean between loss and gain. 
And this is the reason why, upon a dispute arising, 
men have recourse to the judge : going to the judge is 
in fact going to the Just, for the judge is meant to be 
the personification of the Just. 2 And men seek a 



1 i.e. Corrective Justice is wrought out by subtraction 
from the wrong-doer and addition to the party injured. 

2 So ' Justices '. 



136 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

judge as one in the mean, which is expressed in a 
name given by some to judges (fj.eaidioi, or mediators) 
under the notion that if they can hit on the mean 
they shall hit on the Just. The Just is then surely a 
mean since the judge is also. 

So it is the office of a judge to make things equal, 
and the line, as it were, having been unequally di- 
vided, he takes from the greater part that by which 
it exceeds the half, and adds this on to the less. And 
when the whole is divided into two exactly equal por- 
tions, then men say they have their own, when they 
have gotten the equal ; and the equal is a mean 
between the greater and the less according to arith- 
metical equality. 

This, by the way, accounts for the etymology of 
the term by which we in Greek express the ideas 
of Just and Judge (SlKcuov for Sixaioi>, that is in 
two parts, and diKaarrj^ for cuxacm??, he who divides 
into two parts). For when from one of two equal 
magnitudes somewhat has been taken and added to 
the other, this latter exceeds the former by twice that 
portion : if it had been merely taken from the former 
and not added to the latter, then the latter would 
have exceeded the former only by that one portion ; 
but in the other case, the greater exceeds the mean 
by one, and the mean exceeds also by one that magni- 
tude from which the portion was taken. By this 
illustration, then, we obtain a rule to determine what 
one ought to take from him who has the greater, and 
what to add to him who has the less. The excess of 
the mean over the less must be added to the less, and 
the excess of the greater over the mean be taken from 
the greater. 

Thus let there be three straight lines equal to 
one another. From one of them cut off a portion, 
and add as much to another of them. The whole 
line thus made will exceed the remainder 
of the first - named line, by twice the portion 
added, and will exceed the untouched line by that 



CHAP, vtn ETHICS 137 

portion. 3 And these terms loss and gain are derived 
from voluntary exchange : that is to say, the having 
more than what was one's own is called gaining, and 
the having less than one's original stock is called 
losing ; for instance, in buying or selling, or any other 
transactions which are guaranteed by law : but when 
the result is neither more nor less, but exactly the 
same as there was originally, 4 people say they 
have their own, and neither lose nor gain. 

So then the Just we have been speaking of is a 
mean between loss and gain arising in involuntary 
transactions ; that is, it is the having the same after 
the transaction as one had before it took place. 



CHAPTER VIII 

Of the way in which Reciprocation enters into Justice 

THERE are people who have a notion that Recipro- 
cation [or Retaliation] is simply just, as the Pytha- 
goreans said : for they defined the Just simply and 
without qualification as ' That which reciprocates 
with another ' [i.e. an eye for an eye]. But this 
simple Reciprocation will not fit on either to the 
Distributive Just, or the Corrective (and yet this is 
the interpretation they put on the Rhadamanthian l 
rule of Just : 

3 I have omitted the next three lines, as they seem to 
be out of place here, and to occur much more naturally 
afterwards : it not being likely that they were originally 
twice written, one is perhaps at liberty to give Aristotle 
the benefit of the doubt, and conclude that he put them 
where they made the best sense. 

4 This I believe to be the meaning of the passage, but 
do not pretend to bo able to get it out of the words. 

1 Ilhadamanthus, the stern judge of the Under- World. 

-[ED] 



138 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

' If a man should suffer what he hath done, then there 
would be straightforward justice'), 

for in many cases differences arise : as, for instance, 
suppose one in authority has struck a man, he is not 
to be struck in turn ; or if a man has struck one in 
authority, he must not only be struck but punished 
also. 2 And again, the voluntariness or involuntari- 
ness of actions makes a great difference. 

But in dealings of exchange such a principle of 
Justice as this Reciprocation forms the bond of union ; 
but then it must be Reciprocation according to pro- 
portion and not exact equality, because by proportion- 
ate reciprocity of action the social community is held 
together. For either Reciprocation of evil is meant, 
and if this be not allowed it is thought to be a servile 
condition of things : or else Reciprocation of good, 
and if this be not effected then thei'e is no admission 
to participation [i.e. of service] which is the very bond 
of their union. 

And this is the moral of placing the Temple of the 
Graces (xapn-es) in the public streets, to impress the 
notion that there may be requital, this being peculiar 
to %a/J, because a man ought to requite with a good 
turn the man who has done him a favour and then to 
become himself the originator of another x<x/s, by 
doing him a favour. 

Now the acts of mutual giving in due proportion 
may be represented by the diameters of a parallelo- 
gram, at the four angles of which the parties and 
their wares are so placed that the side connecting 



2 This is apparently contrary to what was said before, 
but not really so. Aristotle does not mean that the man 
in authority struck wrongfully, but he takes tho extreme 
case of simple Reciprocation : and in the second case, 
tho man who strikes one in authority commits two offences, 
one against the person (and so far they are equal), and 
aaother against the office. 



CHAP. VIII 



ETHICS 



139 



the parties be opposite to that connecting the wares, 
and each party be connected by one side with his 
own ware, as in the accompanying diagram. 3 



Builder 



Shoemaker 




House 



Shoes 



The builder is to receive from the shoemaker of 
his ware, and to give him of his own : if then there 
be first proportionate equality, and then the Reci- 
procation takes place, there will be the just result 
which we are speaking of : if not, there is no equality, 
nor will the connexion stand : for there is no reason 
why the ware of the one may not be better than that 
of the other, and therefore before the exchange is 
made they must have been equalized. 4 And this is 
so also in the other arts : for they would have been 
destroyed entirely if there were not a correspondence 
in point of quantity and quality between the pro- 
ducer and the consumer. For, we must remember, 
no dealing arises between two of the same kind, two 
physicians, for instance ; but say between a physician 
and agriculturist, or, to state it generally, between 
those who are different and not equal, but these of 



s i.e. ' Cross Conjunction '. [Eo.] 

4 i.e. made commensurable by reference to a common 
standard. [Eo.] 



140 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

course must have been equalized before the exchange 
can take place. 5 

It is therefore indispensable that all things which 
can bo exchanged should be capable of comparison, 
and for this purpose money has come in, and conies 
to be a kind of medium, for it measures all things 
and so likewise the excess and defect ; for instance, 
how many shoes are equal to a house or a given quan- 
tity of food. As then the builder to the shoemaker, 
so many shoes must be to the house (or a quantity of 
corn, if instead of a builder an agriculturist be the 
exchanging party) ; for unless there is this proportion 
there cannot be exchange or dealing, and this pro- 
portion cannot be unless the terms are in some way 
equal ; hence the need, as was stated above, of some 
one measure of all things. Now this is really and truly 
the Demand for them, which is the common bond of 
all such dealings. For if the parties were not in want 
at all or not similarly of one another's wares, there 
would either not be any exchange, or at least not the 
same. 

And money has come to be, by general agreement, 
a representative of Demand : and the account of its 
Greek name t>6/.uo-/j.a is this, that it is what it is, not 
naturally, but by custom or law (v6/j.os), and it rests 
with us to change its value, or make it wholly useless. 

Very wcl! then, there will bo Reciprocation when 
the terms have been equalized so as to stand in this 
proportion ; Agriculturist : Shoemaker : : wares of 
Shoemaker : wares of Agriculturist ; but you must 
bring them to this form of proportion not when they 
exchange, otherwise the one will obtain both advan- 
tages, but when they have exactly their own ; for 



r> i.e. without some common standard it would be 
impossible to say how much bread is a proper return for 
the setting of a broken bone. [ED.] 

15 See an ingenious note in Burnot, p. 228. The point 
as understood in tlio above rendering (not Chase's own) is 



CHAP, vra ETHICS 141 

then they are equal and can have dealings, because this 
equality can come to be in their case. Let A represent 
an agriculturist, C a given quantity of his produce 
food, B a shoemaker, D his wares equalized with A's, 
Then the proportion will be correct, A : B : : C : D ; 
now Reciprocation will be practicable ; otherwise 
there would have been no dealing. 

Now that what connects men in such transactions 
is Demand, as being some one thing, is shown by the 
fact that, when either one does not want the other 
or neither want one another, they do not exchange 
at all : whereas they do when one wants what the 
other man has, wine for instance, giving in return 
corn for exportation. 

And, further, money is a kind of security to us in 
respect of exchange at some future time (supposing 
that one wants nothing now, that we shall have it 
when we do) : the theory of money being that when- 
ever one brings it one can receive commodities in 
exchange. Of course this too is liable to depreciation 
for its purchasing power is not always the same, 
but still it is of a more permanent nature than the 
commodities it represents. And this is the reason 
why all things should have a price set upon them, 
because thus there may be exchange at any time, 
and if exchange then dealing. So money, like a 
measure, making all things commensurable, equalizes 
them : for if there was not exchange there would 
not have been dealing, nor exchange if there were not 
equality, nor equality if there were not the capacity 
of being commensurate : it is impossible that things 
so greatly different should be really commensurate 
but we can approximate sufficiently for all practical 
purposes in reference to Demand. The common 
measure must be some one thing, and also from 

that the superior craftsman is not to gain twice over bv 
(1) his admitted superiority, and (2) the superiority of 
his work or produce. [D.] 



142 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

agreement (tor which reason it is called y(5,ui<r/xa), for this 
makes all things commensurable : in fact, all things 
are measured by money. Let B represent 10 minae, 
A a house worth 5 minse, or in other words half B, 
C a bed worth JQ- of B : it is clear then how many beds 
are equal to one house, namely, five. 

It is obvious also that exchange was thus con- 
ducted before the existence of money : for it makes 
no difference whether you give for a house five beds 
or the price of five beds. 



CHAPTER IX 
On Justice and Injustice 

WE have now said then what the Just and Unjust 
are, and these having been defined it is plain that just 
acting is a mean between acting unjustly and being 
acted unjustly towards : the former being equivalent 
to having more, and the latter to having less. 

But Justice, it must be observed, is a mean state 
not after the same manner as the fore mentioned 
virtues, but because it aims at producing the mean 
while Injustice occupies both the extremes. 

And Justice is the moral state in virtue of which 
the just man is said to do what is just by deliberate 
choice, i.e. in making division between himself and 
another, or between two other men, not so as to give 
to himself the greater and to his neighbour the less 
share of what is choiceworthy and contrariwise of 
what is hurtful, but what is proportionably equal, 
and in like manner when adjudging the rights of two 
other men. 

Injustice is all this with respect to the Unjust : 
and since the Unjust is excess or defect of what is 
good or hurtful respectively, in violation of the pro- 
portionate, therefore Injustice is both excess and 
defect because it aims at producing excess and defect ; 



CHAP, x ETHICS 143 

excess, that is, in a man's own case of what is simply 
advantageous, and defect of what is hurtful : and 
in the case of other men in like manner generally 
speaking, only that the proportionate is violated not 
always in one direction as before but whichever way 
it happens in the given case. And of the Unjust act 
the less is being acted unjustly towards, and the 
greater the acting unjustly towards others. 1 

Let this way of describing the nature of Justice 
and Injustice, and likewise the Just and the Unjust 
generally, be accepted as sufficient. 



CHAPTER X 

On the Ju-st in domestic Relations : a notice of the Sophists' 
notions respecting the Ju-st 



Hf, since a man may do unjust acts and not 
yet have formed a character of injustice, the question 
arises whether there are any particular acts of in- 
justice, the doing of which shows a man to be unjust, 
say a thief, or adulterer, or robber. 

We may say, I think, that this will not of itself 
make any difference ; a man may, for instance, have 
had connexion with another's wife, knowing well with 
whom he was sinning, but he may have done it not 
of deliberate choice but from the impulse of passion : 
Of course he acts unjustly, but he has not necessarily 
formed an unjust character : that is, he may have 
stolen yet not be a thief ; or committed an act of 
adultery but still not be an adulterer, and so on in 
other cases which might be enumerated. 1 ] 

1 Every unjust act embodies 70 UCIKOV. which is a viola- 
iton of TO luov, and so implies a greater and a less share, 
the former being said to fall to the doer, the latter to the 
sufferer, of injury. 

1 This passage certainly occurs awkwardly here. If 
attached to the close of the preceding chapter it would 



144 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

Of the relation Avliich Reciprocation bears to the 
Just we have already spoken : and here it should be 
noticed that the Just which we are investigating is 
both the Just in the abstract and also as exhibited 
in Social Relations, which latter arises in the case of 
those who live in communion with a view to inde- 
pendence and who are free and equal either propor- 
tionately or numerically. 2 

It follows then that those who are not in this position 
have not among themselves the Social Just, but still 
Just of some kind and resembling that other. For 
Just implies mutually acknowledged law, and law the 
possibility of injustice, for adjudication is the act of 
distinguishing between the Just and the Unjust. 

And among whomsoever there is the possibility 
of injustice among these there is that of acting un- 
justly ; but it does not hold conversely that injustice 
is involved in acting unjustly, since by the former we 
mean giving one's self the larger share of what is 
abstractedly good and the less of what is abstractedly 
evil. 

This, by the way, is the reason why we do not allow 
a man to govern, but Principle, because a man governs 
for himself and comes to be a despot : but the office 
of a ruler is to be guardian of the Just and therefore 
of the Equal. We then, since he seems to have no 
peculiar personal advantage supposing him a Just 
man, for in this case he does not allot to himself the 

leave that chapter incomplete, for the question is not 
gone into, but only stated. As the commencement of 
this chapter it is yet more out of place ; I should propose 
to insert it at the commencement of the following chapter, 
to which it forma an appropriate introduction. 

- In a pure democracy men are absolutely (i.e. nume- 
rically) equal, in other forms only proportionately equal. 
Thus the meanest British subject is proportionately equal 
to the Sovereign : that is to say, is as fully secured in his 
rights as the Sovereign in his. 



CHAP, x ETHICS 145 

larger share of what is abstractedly good unless it 
falls to his share proportionately (for which rcnson he 
roally governs for others, and so Justice, men say, 
is a good not to one's self so much as to others, as 
was mentioned before), therefore some compensation 
must be given him, as there actually is in the shape 
of honour and privilege ; and wherever these are not 
adequate there rulers turn into despots. 3 

But the Just which arises in the relations of Master 
and Father, is not identical with, but similar to, these ; 
because there is no possibility of injustice [i.e. in the 
strict sense] towards those tilings which are absolutely 
one's own ; and a slave or child (so long as this last 
is of a certain age and not separated into an inde- 
pendent being), are, as it were, part of a man's self, 
and no man chooses to hurt himself, for which reason 
there cannot be injustice towards one's own self. 
Therefore neither is there the social Unjust or Just, 
which was stated to be in accordance with law and 
to exist between those among whom law naturally 
exists, and these were said to be they to whom belongs 
equality of ruling and being ruled. 

Hence also there is Just rather between a man 
and his wife than between a man and his children 
or slaves ; this is in fact the Just arising in domestic 
relations : and this too is different from the Social 
Just. 

Further, this last-mentioned Just is of two kinds, 
natural and conventional ; the former being that 
which has everywhere the same force and does not 
depend upon being received or not ; the latter being 
that which originally may be this way or that in- 
differently but not after enactment : for instance, 
the price of ransom being fixed at a mina, or the 
sacrificing a goat instead of two sheep ; and again, 
all cases of special enactment, as the sacrificing to 



3 Letter ' the man who is not satisfied with this reward 
makes himself a tyrant '. [Eo.] 



146 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

Brasidas 4 as a hero ; in short, all matters of special 
decree. 

But there are some men who think that all the 
Justs are of this latter kind, and on this ground : 
whatever exists by nature, they say, is unchangeable 
and has everywhere the same force ; fire, for instance, 
burns not here only but in Persia as well, but the 
Justs they see changed in various places. 

Now this is not really so, and yet it is in a way 
(though among the gods perhaps by no means) : still 
even amongst ourselves there is somewhat existing 
by nature : allowing that everything is subject to 
change, still there is that which does exist by nature, 
and that which does not. 

Nay, we may go further, and say that it is prac- 
tically plain what among tilings which can be other- 
wise does exist by nature, and what does not but is 
dependent upon enactment and conventional, even 
granting that both are alike subject to be changed. 
And the same distinctive illustration will apply to 
this and other cases ; the right hand is naturally the 
stronger, though some men may become equally strong 
in both. 

A parallel may be drawn between the Justs which 
depend upon convention and expedience, and mea- 
sures ; for wine and corn measures are not equal in 
all places, but where men buy they are large, and 
where these same sell again they are smaller : well, 
in like manner the Justs which are not natural, but 
of human invention, are not everywhere the same, 
for not even the forms of government are, and yet 
there is one only which by nature would be best in 
all places. 

4 i.e. at Amphipolis where he was killed in the Pelopon- 
iicsian War (-i2 B.C.). [ED.] 



CHAP, xi ETHICS 147 



CHAPTER XI 

Of the distinctions between Unju-st fact-?, Unjust actions, 
and Injustice as a confirmed habit 

Now of Justs and Lawfuls each bears to the acts 
which embody and exemplify it the relation of a 
universal to a particular ; the acts being many, but 
each of the principles only singular because each is 
a universal. And so there is a difference between 
an unjust act and the abstract Unjust, and the just 
act and the abstract Just : I mean, a thing is unjust 
in itself, by nature or by ordinance ; well, when this 
has been embodied in act, there is an act of injustice, 
but not till then, only unjust. And similarly of an 
act of injustice. (Perhaps ou;aio-/>dyj7,a is more cor- 
rectly the common or generic term for just act, the 
word SiKaiufis., which I have here used, meaning 
generally and properly the act corrective of the unjust 
act.) Xow as to each of them, what kinds there are, 
and how many, and what is their object -matter, we 
must examine afterwards. 

For the present we proceed to say that, the Justs 
and the Unjusts being what have been mentioned, 
a man is said to act unjustly or justly when he em- 
bodies these abstracts in voluntary actions, but when 
in involuntary, then he neither acts unjustly or justly 
except accidentally ; I mean, that the being just or 
unjust is really only accidental to the agents in such 
cases. 

So both unjust and just actions are limited by the 
being voluntary or the contrary : for when an unjust, 
action is voluntary, then it is blamed and at the same 
time becomes an unjust action: but, if voluntariness 
does not attach, there will be a thing which is in 
itself unjust but not yet an unjust action. 

By voluntary, I mean, as we stated before, what- 
soever of things in his own power a man does with 



148 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

knowledge, and the absence of ignorance as to the 
person to whom, or the instrument with which, or 
the result with which he acts ; as, for instance, whom 
he strikes, what he strikes him with, and with what 
probable result ; and each of these points again, not 
accidentally nor by compulsion ; as supposing another 
man were to seize his hand and strike a third person 
with it, here, of course, the owner of the hand acts 
not voluntarily, because it did not rest with him to 
do or leave undone : or again, it is conceivable that 
the person struck may be his father, and he may know 
that it is a man, or even one of the present company, 
whom he is striking, but not know that it is his father. 
And let these same distinctions be supposed to be 
carried into the case of the result and in fact the 
whole of any given action. In fine then, that is involun- 
tary which is done through ignorance, or which, not 
resulting from ignorance, is not in the agent's control 
or is done on compulsion. 

I mention these cases, because there are many 
natural things which we do and suffer knowingly 
but still no one of which is cither voluntary or in- 
voluntary, growing old, or dying, for instance. 

Again, accidentally may attach to the just in like 
manner as to the unjust acts. For instance, a man 
may have restored what was deposited with him, but 
against his will and from fear of the consequences of 
a refusal : we must not say that he either does what 
is just, or does justly, except accidentally. And in 
like manner the man who through compulsion and 
against his will fails to restore a deposit, must be said 
to do unjustly, or to do what is unjust, accidentally only. 

Voluntary actions we do either from deliberate 
choice or without it ; from it, when we act from 
previous deliberation ; without it, when without 
any previous deliberation. Since then hurts which 
may be done in transactions between man and man 
are threefold, those are called mistakes which arc 
attended with ignorance, e.g. when a man either does 



CHAP, xi ETHICS 149 

a thing not to the man to whom he meant to do it, 
or not the thing he meant to do, or not with the instru- 
ment, or not with the result which he intended : either 
he did not think he should hit him at all, or not with 
this, or this is not the man he thought he should hit, 
or he did not think this would be the result of the blow 
but a result has followed which he did not anticipate ; 
as, for instance, he did it not to wound but merely to 
prick him : or it is not the man whom, or the way 
in which, he meant. 

Now J when the hurt has come about contrary to all 
reasonable expectation, it is a Misadventure ; when 
though not contrary to expectation yet without any 
viciousness, it is a Mistake ; for a man makes a mis- 
take when the origination of the cause rests with 
himself, he has a misadventure when it is external to 
himself. When again he acts with knowledge, but not 
from previous deliberation, it is an unjust action ; for 
instance, whatever happens to men from anger or 
other passions which are necessary or natural : for 
when doing these hurts or making these mistakes they 
act unjustly of course and their actions are unjust, 
still they are not yet confirmed unjust or wicked per- 
sons by reason of these, because the hurt did not arise 
from depravity in the doer of it : but when it does 
arise from deliberate choice, then the doer is a con- 
firmed unjust and depraved man. 

And on this principle acts done from anger are 
fairly judged not to be from malice prepense, because 
it is not the man who acts in wrath who is the ori- 
ginator really but he who has caused his wrath. And 
again, the question at issue in such cases is not re- 
specting the fact but respecting the justice of the 
case, the occasion of anger being a notion of injury. 2 

1 This is a refinement of the preceding paragraph ; the 
second class of action is described ' When acrain he acts ' 

-[ED.] 

2 ' As distinct from pain or loss '. Bp. Butler's " Sermon 
on Resentment.' See also, Rlict., ii, 2, Dcf. of 0/3717. 



150 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

I mean, that the parties do not dispute about the 
fact, as in questions of contract (where one of the 
two must be a rogue, unless real forgetfulness can 
be pleaded), but, admitting the fact, they dispute on 
which side the justice of the case lies (though a de- 
liberate aggressor, of course, cannot be ignorant), so 
that the one thinks there is injustice committed while 
the other does not. 

Well then, a man acts unjustly if he has hurt another 
of deliberate purpose, and he who commits such acts 
of injustice is ipso facto an unjust character when they 
are in violation of the proportionate or the equal ; 
and in like manner also a man is a just character when 
he acts justly of deliberate purpose, and he does act 
justly if he acts voluntarily. 

Then as for involuntary acts of harm, they are 
either excusable or not : under the former head come 
all errors done not merely in ignorance but from 
ignorance ; under the latter all that are done not from 
ignorance but in ignorance caused by some passion 
which is neither natural nor fairly attributable to 
human infirmity. 

CHAPTER XII 

Can a man be unjustly dealt with willingly ? 

Now a question may be raised whether we have 
spoken with sufficient distinctness as to being un- 
justly dealt with, and dealing unjustly towards others. 

First, whether the case is possible which Euripides 
has put, saying somewhat strangely : 

' My mother I have slain ; the tale is short, 
Either I willingly did slay her willing, 
Or else with her will but against iny own'. 1 

1 Probably from the lost play Alcmccon. It is better 
to take the passage as part of a dialogue, the first lino 
being by one speaker and the remainder a question from 
the other, i.e. 'Didst thou' etc. [Eo.] 



CHAP, xn ETHICS 151 

I mean then, is it really possible for a person to be 
unjustly dealt with with his own consent, or must 
every case of being unjustly dealt with be against the 
will of the sufferer as every act of unjust dealing is 
voluntary ? 

And next, are cases of being unjustly dealt with 
to be ruled all one way as every act of unjust dealing 
is voluntary ? or may we say that some cases are 
voluntary and some involuntary ? 

Similarly also as regards being justly dealt with : 
all just acting is voluntary, so that it is fair to sup- 
pose that the being dealt with unjustly or justly must 
be similarly opposed, as to being either voluntary or 
involuntary. 

Now as for being justly dealt with, the 
position that every case of this is voluntary 
is a strange one, for some are certainly justly dealt 
with without their will. 2 The fact is a man may 
also fairly raise this question, whether in every 
case he who has suffered what is unjust is there- 
fore unjustly dealt with, or rather that the case is 
the same with suffering as it is with acting ; 
namely that in both it is possible to participate 
in what is just, but only accidentally. Clearly the 
case of what is unjust is similar: for doing 
things in themselves unjust is not identical with 
acting unjustly, nor is suffering them the same as 
being unjustly dealt with. So too of acting justly 
and being justly dealt with, since it is impossible to 
be unjustly dealt with unless some one elsa acts un- 
justly or to be justly dealt with unless some one else 
acts justly. 

Xow if acting unjustly is simply ' hurting another 
voluntarily ' (by which I mean, knowing whom you 
are hurting, and wherewith, and how you are hurt- 
ing him), and the man who fails of self-control 



- As when a man is ' justified at the Grass Market ', i.e.. 
hanged. 



152 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

voluntarily hurts himself, then this will be a case of 
being voluntarily dealt unjustly with, and it will 
be possible for a man to deal unjustly with him- 
self. (This by the way is one of the questions 
raised, whether it is possible for a man to deal 
unjustly with himself.) Or again, a man may, by 
reason of failing of self-control, receive hurt from 
another man acting voluntarily, and so here will 
bo another case of being unjustly dealt with 
voluntarily. 

The solution, I take it, is this : the definition of 
being unjustly dealt with is not correct, but we must 
add, to the hurting with the knowledge of the person 
hurt and the instrument and the manner of hurting 
him, the fact of its being against the wish of the man 
who is hurt. 

So then a man may be hurt and suffer what is in 
itself unjust voluntarily, but unjustly dealt with 
voluntarily no man can be : since no man wishes to 
bo hurt, not even he who fails of self-control, who 
really acts contrary to his wish : for no man wishes 
for that which he does not think to be good, and the 
man who fails of self-control docs not what he thinks 
he ought to do. 

And again, he that gives away his own property 
(as Homer says Glaucus gave to Diomed, ' armour 
of gold for brass, armour worth a hundred oxen for 
that which was worth but nine ') is not unjustly 
dealt with, because the giving rests entirely with 
himself; but being unju./tly dealt with does not; 
there must be some other person who is dealing un- 
justly towards him. 

With respect to being unjustly dealt with then, it 
is clear that it is not voluntary. 



CHAP, xiu ETHICS 153 



CHAPTER XIII 

In a case of unfair distribution is the receiver or 
the distributor in fault ? 

THERE remain yet two points on which we pur- 
posed to speak : first, is he chargeable with an unjust 
act who in distribution has given the larger share to 
one party contrary to the proper rate, or he that has 
received the larger share ? next, can a man deal unjustly 
by himself ? 

In the first question, if the first-named alternative 
is possible and it is the distributor who acts unjustly 
and not he who has the larger share, then supposing 
that a person knowingly and willingly gives more to 
another than to himself, here is a case of a man dealing 
unjustly by himself ; which, in fact, moderate men are 
thought to do, for it is a characteristic of the equitable 
man to take less than his due. 

Is not this the answer ? that the case is not quite 
fairly stated, because of some other good, such as 
credit or the abstract honourable, in virtue of which 
in the supposed case the man did get the larger share. 
And again, the difficulty is solved by reference to the 
definition of unjust dealing : for the man suffers 
nothing contrary to his own wish, so that, on this 
score at least, he is not unjustly dealt with, but, if 
anything, he is hurt only. 

It is evident also that it is the distributor who acts 
unjustly and not the man who has the greater share : 
because the mere fact of the abstract Unjust attaching 
to what a man does does not constitute unjust action, 
but the doing this voluntarily : and voluntariness 
attaches to that quarter whence is the origination of 
the action, which clearly is in the distributor, not in 
the receiver. And again the term ' doing ' is used in 
several senses ; in one sense inanimate objects kill, 
or the hand, or the slave by his master's bidding ; 



154 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

these do not act unjustly though the acts they perform 
are unjust. 

Again, suppose that a man has made a wrongful 
award in ignorance ; in the eye of the law he does 
not act unjustly nor is his awarding unjust, but yet 
he is in a certain sense : for the Just according to law 
and primary or natural Just are not coincident : but, 
if he knowingly decided unjustly, then he himself as 
well as the receiver got the larger share, that is, either 
of favour from the receiver or private revenge against 
the other party : and so the man who decided unjustly 
from these motives gets a larger share, in exactly 
the same sense as a man would who received part of 
the actual matter of the unjust action: because in 
this case the man who wrongly adjudged, say a field, 
did not actually get land but money by his unjust 
decision. 

CHAPTER XIV 

Whether acting Justly and Unju-stly is quite within our 
own power ? 

Now men suppose that acting Unjustly rests en- 
tirely with themselves, and conclude that acting Justly 
is therefore also easy. But this is not really so ; to 
have connexion with a neighbour's wife, or strike 
one's neighbour, or give the money with one's hand, 
is of course easy and rests with one's self ; but the 
doing these acts with certain inward dispositions 
neither is easy nor rests entirely with one's self. And 
in like way, the knowing what is Just, and what Unjust 
men think no great instance of wisdom because it is 
not hard to comprehend those things of which the 
laws speak. They forget that these are not Just 
actions, except accidentally : to bo Just they must 
be done and distributed in a certain manner ; and 
this is a more difficult task than knowing what things 
conduce to health ; for in this branch of knowledge 



CHAP, xiv ETHICS 155 

it is an easy matter to know honey, wine, hellebore, 
cautery, or the use of the knife, but the knowing how 
one should administer these with a view to health, 
and to whom and at what time, amounts in fact to 
being a physician. 

From this very same mistake they suppose also, 
that acting Unjustly is equally in the power of the 
Just man, for the Just man no less, nay even more, 
than the Unjust, may be able to do the particular 
acts ; he may be able to have intercourse with a 
woman or strike a man ; or the brave man to throw 
away his shield and turn his ba<;k and run this way 
or that. True : but then it is not the mere doing 
these things which constitutes acts of cowardice or 
injustice (except accidentally), but the doing them 
with certain inward dispositions : just as it is not the 
mere using or not using the knife, administering or 
not administering certain drugs, which constitutes 
medical treatment or curing, but doing these things 
in a certain particular way. 

Again the abstract principles of Justice have their 
province among those who partake of what is ab- 
stractedly good, and can have too much or too little 
of these. 1 Now there are beings who cannot have 
too much of them, as perhaps the gods ; there are 
others, again, to whom no particle of them is of use, 
those who are incurably wicked to whom all things 
are hurtful ; for the rest they are useful to a certain 
degree : for this reason then the province of Justice 
is among Men. 



1 Where the stock of good is limited, if any individual 
takes more than his share some one else must have less 
than his share : where it is infinite, or where there is no 
good at all, this cannot happen. 



156 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

CHAPTER XV 

Of Equity 

WE have next to speak of Equity and the Equitable, 
that is to say, of the relations of Equity to Justice 
and the Equitable to the Just ; for Avhen we look into 
the matter the two do not appear identical nor yet 
different in kind ; and we sometimes commend the 
Equitable and the man who embodies it in his actions, 
so that by way of praise we commonly transfer the 
term also to other acts instead of the term good, 
thus showing that the more Equitable a tiling is the 
better it is. At other times following a certain train 
of reasoning we arrive at a difficulty, in that the 
Equitable, though distinct from the Just, is yet praise- 
worthy ; it seems to follow either that the Just is not 
good or the Equitable not good, since they are by 
hypothesis different ; or, if both are good, then they 
are identical. 

This is a tolerably fair statement of the difficulty 
which on these grounds arises in respect of the Equi- 
table ; but, in fact, all these may be reconciled and 
really involve no contradiction : for the Equitable 
is Just, being also better than one form of Just, but 
is not better than the Just as though it were differ- 
ent from it in kind : Just and Equitable then are 
identical, and, both being good, the Equitable is the 
better of the two. 

What causes the difficulty is this ; the Equitable 
is Just, but not the Just which is in accordance with 
written law, being in fact a correction of that kind of 
Just. And the account of this is, that every law is 
necessarily in general terms, while there are some 
things which it is not possible to speak of rightly in 
any universal or general statement. Where then 
there is a necessity for general statement, while a 
general statement cannot apply rightly to all cases, 



CHAP, xiv ETHICS 157 

the law takes the generality of cases, being fully aware 
of the error thus involved : and rightly too notwith- 
standing, because the fault is not in the law, or in the 
framer of the law, but is inherent in the nature of the 
thing, because the matter of all action is necessarily 
such [i.e. complex]. 

When then the law has spoken in general terms, 
and there arises a case of exception to the general 
rule, it is proper, in so far as the lawgiver omits the 
case and by reason of his universality of statement is 
wrong, to set right the omission by ruling it as the 
lawgiver himself would rule were he there present, 
and would have provided by law had he foreseen the 
case would arise. And so the Equitable is Just but 
better than one form of Just ; I do not mean the 
abstract Just but the error which arises out of the 
universality of statement : and this is the nature of 
the Equitable, ' a correction of Law, where Law is 
defective by reason of its universality '. 

This is the reason why not all things are according 
to law, because there are things about which it is 
simply impossible to lay down a law and so we want 
special enactments for particular cases. For to speak 
generally, the rule of the undefined must be itself un- 
defined also, just as the rule to measure Lesbian 
building is made of lead : for as this rule shifts accord- 
ing to the form of each stone, so the special enactment 
according to the facts of the case in question. 1 

It is clear then what the Equitable is ; namely that 
it is Just but also better than one form of Just : and 
hence it appears too who the Equitable man i? : he 
is one who has a tendency to choose and carry out 
these principles, and who is not apt to press the lerter 

1 This may refer either to Cyclopean polyacnal masonry 
(for which a risicl T square would be insufficient), or to 
the Lesbian moulding which was undulating. There is 
no known reason for applying the term ' Lesbian : to 
Cyclopean work. [E;x] 



158 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK v 

of the law on the worse side but content to waive his 
strict claims though backed by the law : and this 
moral state is Equity, being a species of Justice, not 
a different moral state from Justice. 



Can a man deal Unjustly by himself ? 

THE answer to the second of the two questions 
indicated above, ' whether it is possible for a man to 
deal unjustly by himself ', is obvious from what has 
been already stated. 

In the first place, one class of Justs is those which 
are enforced by law in accordance with Virtue in the 
most extensive sense of the term : for instance, the 
law does not bid a man kill himself ; and whatever it 
does not bid it forbids : well, whenever a man does 
hurt contrary to the law (unless by way of requital 
of hurt) voluntarily, i.e. knowing to whom he does 
it and wherewith, he acts Unjustly. Now he that from 
rage kills himself, voluntarily, does this in contra- 
vention of Right Reason, which the law does not per- 
mit. He therefore acts Unjustly : but towards whom ? 
Towards the Community, not towards himself (because 
he suffers with his own consent, and no man can be 
Unjustly dealt with with his own consent), and on 
this principle the Community punishes him ; that is 
a certain infamy is attached to the suicide as to one 
who acts Unjustly towards the Community. 1 

Next, a man cannot deal Unjustly by himself in 
the sense in which a man is Unjust namely, if he only 
does Unjust acts without being entirely bad (for the 
two things are different, because the Unjust man is in 

* i.e. either by robbing the State of the service it right- 
fully demands, or by bringing upon it bloodguiltiness. 

[ED.] 



CHAP, xvn ETHICS 159 

a way bad, as the coward is, not as though he were 
chargeable with badness in the full extent of the term, 
and so he does not act Unjustly in this sense), because 
if it were so then it would be possible for the same 
thing to have been taken away from and added to 
the same person 2 : but this is really not possible, the 
Just and the Unjust always implying a plurality of 
persons. 

Again, an Unjust action must be voluntary, done 
of deliberate purpose, and aggressive (for the man 
who hurts because he has first suffered and is merely 
requiting the same is not thought to act Unjustly), 
but here the man docs to himself and suffers the same 
thing at the same time. 

Again, it would imply the possibility of being Un- 
justly dealt with with one's own consent. 

And, besides all this, a man cannot act Unjustly 
without his act falling under some particular crime ; 
now a man cannot seduce his own wife, commit a 
burglary on lu's own premises, or steal his own property. 

After all, the general answer to the question is to 
quote our own decision respecting being Unjustly 
dealt with with one's own consent. 



CHAPTER XVII 

Supplementary questions 

IT is obvious, moreover, that being Unjustly dealt 
by and dealing Unjustly by others are both wrong; 
because the one is having less, the other having more, 
than the mean, and the case is parallel to that of the 

2 The reference is to ch. vii, where it was said that the 
law views the parties in a case of particular injustice as 
originally equal, but now unequal, the wrong-doer being 
the gainer and the sufferer the loser by the wrong, but in 
the case above supposed there is but one party. 



160 ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS BOOK y 

healthy in the healing art, and that of good condition 
in the art of training : but still the dealing Unjustly 
by others is the worse of the two, because this involves 
wickedness and is blameworthy (wickedness, I mean, 
either wholly, or nearly so, for not all voluntary wrong 
implies injustice) ; but the being Unjustly dealt by 
does not involve wickedness or an unjust character. 

In itself then, the being Unjustly dealt by is the 
less bad but accidentally it may be the greater evil 
of the two. However, scientific statement cannot 
take in such considerations ; a pleurisy, for instance, 
is called a greater physical evil than a bruise 1 : and 
yet this last may be the greater accidentally ; it may 
chance that a bruise received in a fall may cause one 
to be captured by the enemy and slain. 

Further, Justice, in the way of metaphor and simi- 
litude, there may be, not between a man and himself 
exactly but between certain parts of his nature ; but 
not Justice of every kind, only such as belongs to the 
relation of master and slave, or to that of the head 
of a family. But all through this treatise the rational 
part of the Soul has been viewed as distinct from the 
irrational. 

Now, in this sense, there is thought to be a possibility 
of injustice towards one's self, because herein it is 
possible for men to suffer somewhat in contradiction 
of impulses really their own ; and so it is thought that 
there is Justice of a certain kind between these parts 
mutually, as between ruler and ruled. 

Let this then be accepted as an account of the 
distinctions which we recognize respecting Justice and 
the rest of the moral virtues. 

1 Better perhaps, ' stumble ' or ' sprain '.[Ed.] 



BOOK VI 
CHAPTER I 

Prefatory 

HAVING stated in a former part of this Treatise 
that men should choose the mean instead of either 
the excess or defect, and that the mean is according 
to the dictates of Right Reason ; we will now proceed 
to explain this term. 

For in all the habits which we have expressly men- 
tioned, as likewise in all the others, there is, so to 
speak, a mark with his eye fixed on which the man 
who has Reason tightens or slacks his rope l ; and 
there is a certain limit of those mean states which 
we say are in accordance with Right Reason, and lie 
between excess on the one hand and defect on the 
other. 

Now to speak thus is true enough but conveys 
no very definite meaning. In fact, in all other pur- 
suits requiring attention and diligence on which skill 
and science are brought to bear, it is quite true, of 
course, to say that men are neither to labour nor 
relax too much or too little, but in moderation, and 
as Right Reason directs. Yet if this were all a man 
had he would not be greatly the wiser ; as, for in- 
stance, if in answer to the question, what are proper 
applications to the body, he were to be told, ' Oh ! 
of course, whatever the science of medicine, and in 
such manner as the physician, directs '. 

And so in respect of the mental habits it is requisite 
not merely that this should be true which has been 
already stated, but further that it should be expressly 

1 I understand the illustration to be taken from the 
process of lowering a weight into its place ; a block of 
marble, or stone, for instance, in a building. 



162 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vi 

laid down what Right Reason is, and what is the 
definition of it. 



CHAPTER II 

Division of the Intellect into two distinct parts. The 
function of each determined 

Now in our division of the Excellences of the Soul, 
we said there were two classes, the Moral and the 
Intellectual : the former we have already gone through ; 
and we will now proceed to speak of the others, pre- 
mising a few words respecting the Soul itself. It was 
stated before, you will remember, that the Soul con- 
sists of two parts, the Rational, and the Irrational : 
we must now make a similar division of the Rational. 

Let it be understood then that there are two parts 
of the Soul possessed of Reason ; one whereby we 
realize those existences whose causes cannot be other- 
wise than they are, and one whereby we realize 
those which can be otherwise than they are 1 
(for there must be, answering to things generically 
different, generically different parts of the soul natur- 
ally adapted to each, since those parts of the soul 
possess their knowledge in virtue of a certain resem- 
blance and appropriateness in themselves to the 
objects of which they are percipients) ; and let us 
name the former, ' that which is apt to know, 2 ' the 
latter, ' that w T hich is apt to calculate ' (because de- 
liberating and calculating are the same, and no one 
ever deliberates about things which cannot be other- 
wise than they are : and so the Calculative will be 
one part of the Rational faculty of the soul). 

We must discover, then, which is the best state 
of each of these, because that will be the Excellence 

1 Called for convenience' sake Necessary and Contingent 
matter. 
2 .e. the Scientific. [Ep] 



CHAP, n ETHICS 163 

of each : and this again is relative to the work each 
has to do. 3 

There are in the Soul three functions on which 
depend moral action and truth ; Sense, Intellect, 
Desire. Xow of these Sense is the originating cause 
of no moral action, as is seen from the fact that brutes 
have Sense but are in no way partakers of moral action. 4 

[Intellect and Will are thus connected], what in 
the Intellectual operation is Affirmation and Xegation 
that in the Will is Pursuit and Avoidance. And so, 
since Moral Virtue is a state apt to exercise Moral 
Choice and Moral Choice is Will consequent on de- 
liberation, the Reason must be true and the Will 
right, to constitute good Moral Choice and what the 
Reason affirms the Will must pursue. 5 

3 And therefore the question resolves itself into this, 
' What is the work of the Speculative, and what of the 
Practical, faculty of Reason ? ' See the description of 
d/jfri;, II, 5. 

4 iradtis is here used in its strict and proper meaning. 

5 That is to say, the Will waits upon deliberation in 
which Reason is the judire : when the decision is pro- 
nounced, the Will must act accordingly. 

The question at issue always is. Is thin Govl '-, because 
the Will is only moved by an impression of Good : the 
Decision then will be always Ay or _Yc-, and the mental 
hand is put forth to grasp in the former case, and retracted 
in the latter. 

So far is what must take p'.aoe in er>:ry Moral Action, 
right or wrong, the Machinery of the mind being supposed 
uninjured : but to constitute a good Moral Choice, i.e. a 
good Action, the Reason must have said Ay when it 
ought. 

The cases of faulty action will be, either when the 
Machinery is perfect but wrongly directed, as in the case 
of a deliberate crime ; or when the dire.-tion given bv 
the Reason is right but the Will does not move in accord- 
ance with that direction ; in other words, when the 
Machinery is out of order ; as in the case of the d.'.-^arTjs 
video mdiora proboque, Dettriora aqutr. 



164 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vr 

Now this Intellectual operation and this Truth is 
what bears upon Moral Action ; of course truth and 
falsehood must be the good and the bad of that In- 
tellectual Operation which is purely Speculative and 
concerned neither with action nor production, because 
this is manifestly the work of every Intellectual 
faculty, while of the faculty which is of a mixed Practical 
and Intellectual nature the work is that Truth which, 
as I have described above, corresponds to the right 
movement of Desire. 

Now the starting-point of moral action is Moral 
Choice (I mean, what actually sets it in motion, not 
the final cause), and of Moral Choice, Appetition, 
and Reason directed to a certain result : and thus 
Moral Choice is neither independent of intellect, i.e. 
intellectual operation, nor of a certain moral state : 
for right or wrong action cannot exist independently 
of operation of the Intellect and moral character. 

Reasoning by itself moves nothing, but only when 
directed to a certain result, i.e. exercised in Moral 
Action (I say nothing of its being exercised in pro- 
duction, because this function is originated by the 
former : every one who makes makes with a view to 
somewhat further ; and that which is or may be made 
is not an End in itself, but only relatively to some- 
what and some one else 6 : whereas that which is or 
may be done is an End in itself, because acting well is 
an End in itself, and this is the object of the Will), 
and so Moral Choice is either Intellect Desiring, or 
Desire under the control of Intellect. And this 
capacity for originating action constitutes Man. 

But nothing which is done and past can be the 
object of Moral Choice ; for instance, no man chooses 

The cobbler is at his last ; why ? to make shoes, 
which are to clothe the feet of some one : and the price 
to be paid, i.e. the produce of his industry, is to enable 
him to support his wife and children ; thus his production 
is subordinate to Moral x4ction. 



CHAP, m ETHICS 165 

to have sacked Troy ; because, in fact, no one ever 
deliberates about what is past, but only about that 
which is future and which may therefore be influenced, 
whereas what has been cannot be undone : and so 
Agathon is right in saying, 

' Of this alone is Deity bereft, 
To make undone whatever hath been done.' 

Thus then Truth is the aim of both the Intellectual 
Parts of the Soul ; those states, therefore, are the 
Excellences of each in which each will best attain 
truth. 



The Excellences of the Intellectual or Rational Part of the 
Soul enumerated. Science slightly discussed 

COMMENCING then from the point stated above, we 
will now speak of these Excellences again. Let those 
faculties whereby the Soul attains truth in Affirmation 
or Negation be assumed to be in number five : viz. 
Art, Science, Common Sense or Prudence, Wisdom, 
Intuition [better ' Reason '] (Supposition and Opinion 
I do not include, because by these one may go 
wrong). 1 

What Science is is plain from the following con- 
siderations, if one is to speak accurately instead of 
metaphorically. We all conceive that what we 
strictly speaking know cannot be otherwise than it 
is, because as to those things which can be otherwise 
than they are we are uncertain whether they are or 
are not the moment they cease to be within the sphere 
of our actual observation. 

1 The original reads here ' Art, Knowledge, Practical 
Wisdom, Science, Intuition '. The second and fourth are 
incorrect (see below). [Eo.] 



166 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK VI 

So then, whatever comes within the range of Science 
is by necessity, and therefore is eternal (because all 
things are so which exist necessarily), and all eternal 
things are without beginning and indestructible. 

Again, all Science is thought to be capable of being 
taught, and what comes within its range capable of 
being learned. And all teaching is based upon previous 
knowledge (a statement you will find in the Analytics 
also 2 ), for there are two ways of teaching, by Syllogism 
and by Induction. In fact, Induction is the source 
of universal propositions, and Syllogism reasons from 
these universals. Syllogism then may reason from 
principles which cannot be themselves proved Syl- 
logistically ; and therefore must be proved by In- 
duction. 

So Science is ' a formed habit or mental faculty apt 
to demonstrate syllogistically ', etc., as in the Ana- 
lytics 3 : because a man, strictly and properly speak- 
ing, Icnoivs [i.e. scientifically], when he establishes his 
conclusion in a certain way and the principles are 
known to him : for if they are not better known to him 
than the conclusion such knowledge as he has will be 
merely accidental. 

Let thus much be accepted as a definition of Science. 



CHAPTER IV 
Of Art 

MATTER which may exist otherwise than it actually 
does in any given case (commonly called Contingent), 
is of two kinds, that which is the object of Making 



" It is the opening statement of the Post Analytics. 

" The reference is to the Post. Analyt. i, n. [We may 
know a scientific fact, e.g. that a stone falls straight to 
the ground, without knowing the reason. In such a case 
the knowledge is accidental, not scientific. ED.] 



. iv ETHICS 167 

[better ' Production '], and that which is the object 
of Doing ; now Making and Doing are two different 
things (according to the popular distinction), and 
so that state of mind, conjoined with Reason, which 
is apt to Do, is distinct from that also conjoined with 
Reason, which is apt to Make : and for this reason 
they are not included one by the other, that is, Doing 
is not Making, nor Making Doing. 1 Now as Archi- 
tecture is an Art, and is the same as ' a certain trained 
capacity to produce, conjoined with Reason ', and as 
there is no Art which is not such, nor any such which 
is not an Art, Art, in its strict and proper sense, must 
be a trained capacity to produce under the guidance 
of accurate Reason. 

Now all Art has to do with Production, and con- 
trivance, and seeing how any of those things may 
be produced which may either be or not be, and the 
origination of which rests with the maker and not 
with the thing made. 

So neither things which exist or come into being , 
necessarily, nor things in the way of nature, come 
under the province of Art, because these are self- 
originating. And since Making and Doing are dis- 
tinct, Art must be concerned with the former and not 
the latter. And in a certain sense Art and Fortune 
are concerned with the same things, as Agathon says 
by the way : 

' Art Fortune loves, and is of her beloved.' 

So Art, as lias been stated, is ' a trained capacity 
to produce under the guidance of accurate Reason ' ; 
its absence, on the contrary, is the same capacity 
conjoined with false Reason, and both are employed 
upon Contingent matter. 



1 This is the test of, correct logical division, that the 
membra dividentia shall be opposed, i.e. not included the 
one by the other. 



168 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vi 

CHAPTER V 

Of Practical Wisdom l 

As for Practical Wisdom, we shall ascertain its 
nature by examining to what kind of persons wo in 
common language ascribe it. 2 

It is thought then to be the property of the Practi- 
cally Wise [Prudent] to deliberate well respecting 
what is good and expedient for himself, not in any 
definite line, 3 as what is conducive to health or 
strength, but what to living well. A proof of this is 
that we call men Sensible in this or that, when they 
calculate well with a view to some good end in a case 
where there is no definite rule [as in an Art]. And so, 
in a general way of speaking, the man who is good at 
deliberation will be Practically Wise. Now no man 
deliberates respecting things which cannot be other- 
wise than they are, nor such as lie not within the 
nnge of his own action : and so, since Science requires 
strict demonstrative reasoning, of which Contingent 
matter does not admit (I say Contingent matter, because 
all matters of deliberation must be Contingent and 
deliberation cannot take place with respect to things 
which are Necessarily), Practical Wisdom cannot be 
Science nor Art ; not the former, because what falls 
under the province of Doing must be Contingent, 
not the latter, because Doing and Making are different 
in kind. 

It remains then that it must be ' a state of mind 
true, conjoined with Reason, and concerned with 

1 Bettor ' Common Sense ' or ' Prudence ' in this and 
succeeding chapters. [Eix] 

" See the parable of the Unjust Steward, in which the 
popular sense is strongly brought out. Luke, xvi, 8. 

a Compare the UTT\WS and Ko.O'' e/cairra irfTra.i5evfj.evos of 
Ek. i, eh. i. 



CHAP, v ETHICS 169 

action, having for its object those things which are 
good or bad for Man ' : because of Making something 
.beyond itself is always the object, but cannot be of 
Doing because the very well-doing is in itself an 
End. 

For this reason we think Pericles and men of that 
stamp to be Practically Wise, because they can see 
what is good for themselves and for men in general, 
and we also think those to be such who are skilled in 
domestic management or civil government. In fact, 
this is the reason why we call Temperance by the 
name which in Greek it bears, etymologically signify- 
ing ' that which preserves the Practical Wisdom ' : 
for what it does preserve is the Notion I have men- 
tioned, i.e. of one's own true interest. 

For it is not every kind of Notion which the pleasant 
and the painful corrupt and pervert, as, for instance, 
that ' the three angles of every rectilineal triangle are 
equal to two right angles ', but only those bearing on 
moral action. 

For the Principles of the matters of moral action 
are the final cause of them : now to the man who 
has been corrupted by reason of pleasure or pain the 
Principle immediately becomes obscured, nor does he 
see that it is his duty to choose and act in each instance 
with a view to this final cause and by reason of it : 
for viciousness has a tendency to destroy the moral 
Principle : and so Practical Wisdom must be ' a state 
conjoined with reason, true, having human good fo 
its object, and producing action '. 

Then again Art has an excellence outside itself, but 
Practical Wisdom has not : and in Art he who goes 
wrong purposely is preferable to him who does so 
unwittingh*, 4 but not so in respect of Practical Wisdom 

4 He would be a Idler CJ/ytni?t who should poison 
intentionally, than he on whose mind the prevailing im- 
pression was that ' Epsom Salts mean Oxalic Acid ; and 
Syrup of Senna Laudanum '. 



170 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vi 

or the other Virtues. It plainly is then an Excellence 
of a certain kind, and not an Art. 

Now as there are two parts of the Soul which have 
Reason, it must be the Excellence of Opinion [which 
we called before .calculative or deliberative], because 
both Opinion and Practical Wisdom are exercised 
upon Contingent matter. And further, it is not simply 
a state conjoined with Reason, as is proved by the 
fact that such a state may be forgotten and so lost 
while Practical Wisdom cannot. 



CHAPTER Vi 

Of Intuition J 

Now Science is a conception concerning universals 
and Necessary matter, and there are of course certain 
First Principles in all trains of demonstrative reasoning 
(that is of all Science because this is connected with 
reasoning) : that faculty, then, which takes in the 
first principles of that which comes under the range 
of Science, cannot be either Science, or Art, or Practical 
Wisdom : not Science, because what is the object of 
Science must be derived from demonstrative reason- 
ing ; not either of the other two, because they are 
exercised upon Contingent matter only. Nor can it 
be Wisdom which takes in these, because the Wise 
Man must in some cases depend on demonstrative 
Reasoning. 

It comes then to this : since the faculties whereby 
we always attain truth and are never deceived when 
dealing with Matter Necessary or even Contingent are 
Science, Common Sense, Wisdom, and Intuition, and 



1 Reason, or Pure Reason, is perhaps a more accurate 
rendering. It is the faculty which apprehends, e.g. the 
axioms of Geometry, i.e., self-evident, undemonstrable 

truths. [ED.] 



CHAP, vii ETHICS 171 

the faculty which takes in First Principles cannot 
be any of the three first ; the last, namely Intuition, 
must be it which performs this function. 



CHAPTER VII 

Of Wisdom, 1 in itself, and in relation to Prudence 

WISDOM is a term we use principally in two mean- 
ings : in the first place, in the Arts we ascribe it to 
those who carry their arts to the highest accuracy ; 
Phidias, for instance, we call an expert or cunning 
sculptor ; Polycleitus an expert or cunning statuary ; 
meaning, in this instance, nothing else by Wisdom 
than an excellence of art : in the other sense, we 
think some to be Wise in a general way, not in any 
particular line or in any particular thing, just as Homer 
says of a man in his Margites, ' Him the gods made 
neither a digger of the ground, nor ploughman, nor in 
any other way Wise '. 

So it is plain that Wisdom must mean the most 
accurate of all Science ; but if so, then the Wise man 
must not merely know the deductions from the First 
Principles but be in possession of truth respecting the 
First Principles. So that Wisdom must be equivalent 
to Intuition and Science ; it is, so to speak, scientific 
Knowledge of the most precious objects, with a head 
on. 2 

1 The term Wisdom is used in our English translation 
of the Old Testament in the sense first given to Zo^t'o. here. 
' Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise- 
hearted man, in whom the Lord put wisdom and under- 
standing to know how to work all manner of work for 
the service of the Sanctuary.' Exodus xxxvi, 1. [Of 
course the term is not used in this sense now, though for 
the sake of clearness it is best to retain it here. [Eo.] 

2 'E7n<7T?7/x77 and XoOs, (in the strict sense, for it is used 
in many different senses in this book), arc different parts 



172 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vi 

I say ' of the most precious things ', because it is 
absurd to suppose political science, 3 or Practical Wis- 
dom, to be the highest, unless it can be shown that Man 
is the most excellent of all that exists in the Universe. 
Now if ' healthy ' and ' good ' are relative terms, 
differing when applied to men or to fish, but ' white ' 
and ' straight ' are the same always, men must allow 
that the Wise is the same always, but Prudence 
varies : for whatever provides all things well for itself, 
to this they would apply the term Prudence, and 
commit these matters to it ; which is the reason, 
by the way, that they call some brutes Sensible, such, 
that is, as plainly have a faculty of forethought respect- 
ing their own subsistence. 

And it is quite plain that Wisdom and Political 
Science cannot be identical ; because if men give the 
name of Wisdom to that faculty which is employed 
upon what is expedient for themselves, there will be 
many instead of one, because there is not one and the 
same faculty employed on the good of all animals 
collectively, unless in the same sense as you may 
say there is one art of healing with respect to all. living 
beings. 

If it is urged that man is superior to all other ani- 
mals, that makes no difference: for there are many 
other things more godlike in their nature than Man, 
as, most obviously, the elements of which the Universe 
is composed. 4 

of the whole function aocfria ; eVtemJA"? takes in con- 
clusions, drawn by strict reasoning from Principles of a 
certain kind which XoPs supplies. It is conceivable that 
a man might go on gaining these Principles by Intuition 
and never reasoning from them, and so NoOs might exist 
independent of etnar-fiinTi, but not this without that. Put 
the two together, the head to the trunk, and you form 
the living being ^,o<f>ia. 

s Here used in its most extensive sense. 

4 Peters and Burnet translate, 'as ... the heavenly 
bodies '. 



CHAP, vm ETHICS 173 

It is plain then that Wisdom is the union of Science 
and Pure Reason, and has for its objects those things 
which are most precious in their nature. Accordingly, 
Anaxagoras, Thales, and men of that stamp, people 
call Wise, not Sensible, because they see them ignorant 
of what concerns themselves ; and they say that what 
they know is quite out of the common run certainly, 
and wonderful, and hard, and very fine no doubt, but 
still useless because they do not seek after what is good 
for them as Men. 



CHAPTER VIII 

Additional notes upon Practical Wisdom [or Prudence 
or Common Sense'] 

BUT Practical Wisdom is employed upon human 
matters, and such as are objects of deliberation (for 
we say, that to deliberate well is most peculiarly the 
work of the man who possesses this Wisdom), and no 
man deliberates about things which cannot be other- 
wise than they are, nor about any save those that 
have some definite End and this End attainable good ; 
and the man to whom we should give the name of 
Good in Counsel, simply and without modification, is 
he who in the way of calculation has a capacity for 
attaining that of practical goods which is the best for 
Man. 

Nor again does Practical Wisdom consist in a know- 
ledge of general principles only, but it is necessary 
that one should know also the particular details, be- 
cause it is apt to act, and action is concerned with 
details. For which reason sometimes men who have 
not much knowledge are more practical than others 
who have ; among others, they who derive all they 
know from actual experience. Suppose a man to 
know, for instance, that light meats are easy of diges- 
tion and wholesome, but not what kinds of meat are 



174 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vi 

light, he will not produce a healthy state ; that man 
will have a much better chance of doing so, who knows 
that the flesh of birds is light and wholesome. Since 
then Practical Wisdom is apt to act, one ought to have 
both kinds of knowledge, or, if only one, the know- 
ledge of details rather than of Principles. So there will 
be in respect of Practical Wisdom the distinction of 
supreme and subordinate. 1 

Further : Political Science and Practical Wisdom 
are the same mental state, but the point of view is 
not the same. 

Of Practical Wisdom exerted upon a community 
that which I would call the Supreme is the faculty 
of Legislation ; the subordinate, which is concerned 
with the details, generally has the common name 
Political, and its functions are Action and Deliber- 
ation (for the particular enactment is a matter of 
action, being the ultimate issue of this branch of 
Practical Wisdom, and therefore people commonly 
say that these men alone are really engaged in govern- 
ment, because they alone act, filling the same place 
relatively to legislators, that workmen do to a master). 

Again, that is thought to be Practical Wisdom in 
the most proper sense which has for its object 
the interest of the Individual : and this usually 
appropriates the common name : the others are 
called respectively Domestic Management, Legislation, 

1 In every branch of Moral Action in which Practical 
Wisdom is employed there will be general principles and 
the application of them ; but in some branches there are 
distinct names appropriated to the operation of Practical 
Wisdom, in others there are not. Thus Practical Wisdom, 
when employed on the general principles of Civil Govern- 
ment, is called Legislation ; as administering its particular 
functions it is called simply Government. In Domestic 
Management, there are of course general Rules, and also 
the particular application of them ; but here the faculty 
is called only by one name. So too when Self-interest is 
the object of Practical Wisdom. 



CTTAP. vm ETHICS 175 

Executive Government divided into two branches, 
Deliberative and Judicial. Now of course, knowledge 
for one's self is one kind of knowledge, but it admits 
of many shades of difference : and it is a common 
notion that the man who knows and busies himself 
about his own concerns merely is the man of Practical 
Wisdom, while they who extend their solicitude to 
society at large are considered meddlesome. 

Euripides has thus embodied this sentiment ; ' How ', 
says one of his characters, ' how foolish am I, who 
whereas I might have shared equally, idly numbered 
among the multitude of the army . . . for them 
that are busy and meddlesome [Jove hates] ', because 
the generality of r_ankind seek their own good and 
hold that this is their proper business. It is then 
from this opinion that the notion has arisen that such 
men are the Practically-Wise. And yet it is possible 
that the good of the individual cannot be secured 
independently of connection with a family or a com- 
munity. And again, how a man should manage his 
own affairs is sometimes not quite plain, and must be 
made a matter of enquiry. 

A corroboration of what I have said is the fact, 
that the young come to be geometricians, and mathe- 
maticians, and Wise in such matters, but it is not 
thought that a young man can come to be possessed 
of Practical Wisdom : now the reason is, that this 
Wisdom has for its object particular facts, which come 
to be known from experience, which a young man has 
not because it is produced only by length of time. 

By the way, a person might also enquire 2 why a 
boy may be made a mathematician but not Wise or 
a natural philosopher. Is not this the reason ? that 
mathematics are taken in by the process of abstrac- 
tion, but wisdom and natural philosophy must be 

2 This observation seems to be introduced, simply be- 
cause suggested by the last, and not because at all relevant 
to the matter in hand. 



176 ARISTOTLE'S COOK vi 

gained by experiment ; and the latter young men 
talk of but do not realize, while the nature of the 
former is plain and clear. 

Again, in matter of practice, error attaches either 
to the general rule, in the process of deliberation, or 
to the particular fact : for instance, this would be a 
general rule, ' All water of a certain gravity is bad ' ; 
the particular fact, ' this water is of that gravity '. 

And that Practical Wisdom is not science is plain, 
for it has to do with particulars, 3 as has been said, 
because every object of action is of this nature. 

To Intuition it is opposed, for this takes in those 
principles which cannot be proved by reasoning, while 
Practical Wisdom is concerned with the ultimate 
particular fact which cannot be realized by Science 
but by Sense 4 ; I do not mean one of the five senses, 
but the same by which we take in the mathematical 
fact, that no rectilineal figure can be contained by less 
than three lines, i.e. that a triangle is the ultimate 
figure, because here also is a stopping point. 

This however is Sense rather than Practical Wisdom, 
which is of another kind. 



CHAPTER IX 

Of Good Counsel 

Now the acts of enquiring and deliberating differ, 
though deliberating is a kind of enquiring. We ought 
to ascertain about Good Counsel likewise what it is, 

3 Particulars are called &rxara because they are last 
arrived at in the deliberative process ; but a little further 
on we have the term applied to first principles, because 
they stand at one extremity, and facts at the other, of 
the line of action. 

4 This may be distinguished from Common Sense by the 
context ; ' Perception ' is perhaps the better rendering. 

[ED.] 



CHAP, ix ETHICS 111 

whether a kind of Science, or Opinion, or Happy Con- 
jecture, or some other kind of faculty. Science it 
obviously is not, because men do not enquire about 
what they know, and Good Counsel is a kind of de- 
liberation, and the man who is deliberating is enquiring 
and calculating. 

Neither is it Happy Conjecture, because this is 
independent of reasoning, and a rapid operation ; 
but men deliberate a long time, and it is a common 
saving that one should execute speedily what has 
been resolved upon in deliberation, but deliberate 
slowly. 

Quick perception of causes l again is a different 
faculty from Good Counsel, for it is a species of Happy 
Conjecture. Nor is Good Counsel Opinion of any 
kind 

Well then, since he who deliberates ill goes wrong, 
and he who deliberates well does so rightly, it is clear 
that Good Counsel is lightness of some kind, but not 
of Science nor of Opinion : for Science cannot be 
called ri?ht because it cannot be wrong, and Right ness 
of Opinion is Truth : and again, all which is the 
object of opinion is definitely marked out.' 2 

Still, however, Good Counsel is not independent of 

1 The definition of it in the Organon (Post. Analyt., i, 
xxiv = 9b 10): 'a happy conjecture of the middle term 
without time to consider of it '. 

The quaestio states the phenomena, and the middle 
term the causation the rapid ascertaining of which con- 
stitutes a.- l -xivoiz. 

All that receives light from the sun is bright on the 

side next to the sun. 
The moon receives lieht from the sun. 
.'.The moon is bright on the side next the sun. 
The d'txivota. consists in rapidly and correctly account- 
ing for the observed fact, that the moon is bright on the 
side next to the sun. 

2 Opinion is a complete, deliberation an incomplete, 
mental act. 



178 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vt 

Reason. Does it remain then that it is a tightness 
of Intellectual Operation simply, because this does 
not amount to an assertion ? and the objection to 
Opinion was that it is not a process of enquiry but 
already a definite assertion ; whereas whosoever de- 
liberates, whether well or ill, is engaged in enquiry 
and calculation. 

Well, Good Counsel is a Rightness of deliberation, 
and so the first question must regard the nature and 
objects of deliberation. Now remember Rightness 
is an equivocal term; we plainly do not mean Rightness 
of any kind whatever ; the incontinent, for instance, 
or the bad man, will obtain by his calculation what 
he sets before him as an object, and so he may be said 
to have deliberated rightly in one sense, but will have 
attained a great evil. Whereas to have deliberated 
well is thought to be a good, because Good Counsel is 
Rightness of deliberation of such a nature as is apt 
to attain good. 

But even this again you may get by false reason- 
ing, and hit upon the right efi'ect though not through 
right means, 3 your middle term being fallacious : and 
so neither will this be yet Good Counsel in consequence 
of which you get what you ought but not through 
proper means. 

Again, one man may hit on a thing after long de- 
liberation, another quickly. And so that before de- 
scribed will not be yet Good Counsel, but the Right- 
ness irmst be with reference to what is expedient ; 
and you must have a proper end in view, pursue it in 
a right manner and right time. 

Once more. One may deliberate well either generally 
or towards some particular End. 4 Good Counsel in 

3 The End does not sanctify the Means. 

* The meaning is, there is one End including all others : 
and in this sense Practical Wisdom is concerned with 
means, not Ends : but there are also many subordinate 
Edsu which are in fact Means to the Groat End of all. 



CHAP, x ETHICS 179 

the general, then, is that which goes right towards that 
which is the End in a general way of consideration ; 
in particular, that which does so towards some par- 
ticular End. 

Since then deliberating well is a quality of men 
possessed of Practical Wisdom, Good Counsel must 
be ' Rightness in respect of what conduces to a given 
End, of which Practical Wisdom gives the true con- 
ception '. 



CHAPTER X 

Of Intelligence and Judgment 

THERE is too the faculty of Intelligence, and also 
its absence, in virtue of which we call men Intelligent 
or the contrary. 1 

Now Intelligence is neither entirely identical with 
Science or Opinion (for then all would have been In- 
telligent), nor is it any one specific science, as medical 
science whose object-matter is things wholesome, or 
geometry whose object-matter is magnitude, for it 
has not for its object things which always exist and 
are immutable, nor of those things which come into 
being just any which may chance ; but those in respect 
of which a man might doubt and deliberate. 

And so it has the same object matter as Practical 
Wisdom ; yet the two faculties are not identical, 
because Practical Wisdom has the capacity for com- 
manding and taking the initiative, for its End is ' what 

Good counsel has reference not merely to the grand End, 
but to the subordinate Ends which Practical Wisdom 
selects as being right means to the Grand End of all. 

"Most modern texts read differently, making the dis- 
tinction not between Intelligence and the lack of it, but 
between Intelligence simply and Sound or Perfect Intelli- 
gence. [Eo.] 



180 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vi 

one should do or not do ' : but .Intelligence is only apt 
to decide upon suggestions (though we do in Greek 
put ' well ' on to the faculty and its concrete noun, 
these really mean exactly the same as the plain words), 
and Intelligence is neither the having Practical Wisdom, 
nor attaining it : but just as learning is said to show 
intelligence when a man uses his knowledge, so Intel- 
ligence consists in employing the Opinionative faculty 
in judging concerning those things which come within 
the province of Practical Wisdom, when another 
enunciates them ; and not judging merely, but judging 
well. And the name of this faculty is derived from 
the use of the term in learning : navQaveiv and awUvat. 
being often used as synonymous. 

The faculty called yvdifj.ij, 2 in right of which we 
call men evyi>u/j.oves, or say they have yv^^y, is ' the 
right judgment of the equitable man '. A proof of 
which is that we most commonly say that the equitable 
man has a tendency to make allowance, and the 
making allowance in certain cases is equitable. And 
ffvyyvw/j.7] (the word denoting allowance) is right yyw/j-ij 
having a capacity of making equitable decisions. By 
' right ' I mean that which attains the True. 



CHAPTER XI 

Of the coincidence of the faculties of Practical Wisdom, 
Practical Intuition, Intelligence, and Judgment 

Now all these formed faculties tend to the same 
object, as indeed common language leads us to ex- 

2 We have no term which at all approximates to the 
meaning of this word, much less will our language admit 
of the play upon it which connects it with <rvyyvi^fjL-ij. 
[Aristotle is here, with unnecessary conscientiousness, 
trying to make accurate technical distinctions in the 
sphere of everyday language. Hence the futility of any 
translation. ED.] 



CHAP, xi ETHICS 181 

pcct : I mean, we speak of Judgment, Intelligence, 
Practical Wisdom, and Practical Intuition, attributing 
the possession of Judgment and Intuition to the same 
Individuals whom we denominate Practically-Wise 
and Intelligent : because all these faculties are em- 
ployed upon the extremes, i.e. on particular details ; 
and in right of his aptitude for deciding on the matters 
which come within the province of the Practically- 
Wise, a man is Intelligent and possessed of kindly 
Judgment, i.e. he is disposed to make allowance, for 
considerations of equity are entertained by all good 
men alike in transactions with their fellows. 

And all Action belongs to the class of particulars, 
otherwise called extremes : for the man of Practical 
Wisdom must know them, and Intelligence and Judg- 
ment are concerned with matters of Action, which are 
extremes. 

Intuition, moreover, takes in the extremes at both 
ends l : I mean, the first and last terms must be 
taken in not by reasoning but by Intuition [so that 
Intuition comes to be of two kinds], and that which 
belongs to strict demonstrative reasonings takes in 
immutable, i.e. Necessary, first terms ; while that 
which is employed in practical matters takes in the 
extreme, the Contingent, which belongs to the minor 
Premise [of the practical syllogism] for the minor 
Premises are the source of the Final Cause, Universals 
being made up out of Particulars. To take in these, 
of course, we must have Sense, i.e. in other words 
Intuition [or Reason]. 

And for this reason these are thought to be simply 

1 There are cases where we must pimply accept or reject 
without proof: either when Principles are propounded 
which are prior to all reason! nir, or when particular facts 
are brought before us whijh are simply matters of ai'<r0?/o-ij. 
Aristotle here brings both those cases within the province 
of vo~s, i.e. he calls by tlii:; name the Faculty which attains 
Truth iu each. 



182 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vi 

gifts of nature ; and whereas no man is thought to be 
Wise by nature, men are thought to have Judgment 
and Intelligence, and Intuition : a proof of which is 
that we think these faculties are a consequence even 
of particular ages, and this given age has Intuition 
and Judgment, we say, as if under the notion that 
nature is the cause. And thus Intuition is both the 
beginning and the end, for the proofs are based upon 
the one kind of extremes and wind up with the other. 
And so 2 one should attend to the unclemonstrated 
dicta and opinions of the experienced, the old and the 
Practically Wise, no less than to those which are 
based on strict reasoning, because they see aright 
having gained their power of moral vision from ex- 
perience. 



CHAPTER XII 

Objections to the usefulness of these Intellectual Excel- 
lences. The Answers. A fuller description and 
analysis of Practical Wisdom 

WELL we have now stated the nature and objects 
of Practical Wisdom 1 and Wisdom respectively, and 
that they belong each to a different part of the Soul. 
But I can conceive a person questioning their utility. 
' Wisdom ', he would say, ' concerns itself with none 
of the causes of human happiness' (for it has nothing 
to do with producing anything) : Practical Wisdom 
has this recommendation, I grant, but where is the 



2 The consequentia is this : There are cases both of 
principles and facts which cannot admit of reasoning, 
and must be authoritatively determined by vovs. What 
makes vovs to be a true guide ? only practice, i.e. Ex- 
perience, and therefore, &c. 

1 It should be remembered throughout this chapter 
that ' Pmdence ' or ' Good (Common) Sense ' is a better 
rendering of the Greek than ' Practical Wisdom '. [Eo.] 



CHAP, xii ETHICS 183 

need of it, since its province is those things which 
are just and honourable, and good for man, and these 
are the things which the good man as such does ; but 
we are not a bit the more apt to do them because we 
know them, since the Moral Virtues are Habits ; just 
as we are not more apt to be healthy or in good con- 
dition from mere knowledge of what relates to these 
(I mean, of course, things so called not from their 
producing health, &c. but from their evidencing it in 
a particular subject), for we are not more apt to be 
healthy and in good condition merely from knowing 
the art of medicine or training. 

If it be urged that knowing what is good does not 
by itself make a Practically Wise man, but becoming 
good, still this Wisdom will be no use either to those 
that are good, and so have it already, or to those 
who have it not ; because it will make no difference 
to them whether they have it themselves or put them- 
selves under the guidance of others who have ; and 
we might be contented to be in respect of this as in 
respect of health : for, though we wish to be healthy, 
still we do not set about learning the art of healing. 

Furthermore, it would seem to be strange that, 
though lower in the scale than Wisdom, it is to be 
its master ; which it is, because whatever produces 
results takes the rule and directs in each matter. 

This then is what we are to talk about, for these 
are the only points now raised. 

Xow first we say that being respectively Excellences 
of different parts of the Soul they must be choice- 
worthy, even on the supposition that they neither of 
them produce results. 

In the nest place we say that they do produce 
results ; that Wisdom makes Happiness, not as 
the medical art but as healthiness makes health 2 : 

- Healthiness is the formal) , . . . 

Medicine is the efficient ) caus * of health " 
See Bk. X, eh. 4. l'c-eo oio' 'q i'/iaa. Kal 6 iarp^s bp.o'.(a$ 



184 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vi 

because, being a part of Virtue in its most extensive 
sense, it makes a man happy by being possessed and 
by working. 

Next, Man's function as Man is accomplished by 
virtue of Practical Wisdom and Moral Virtue, the 
latter giving the right aim and direction, the former 
the right means to its attainment ; but of the fourth 
part of the Soul, the mere nutritive principle, there is 
no such Excellence, because nothing is in its power to 
do or leave undone. 3 

As to our not being more apt to do what is noble 
and just by reason of possessing Practical Wisdom, 
we must begin a little higher up, taking this for our 
starting-point. As we say that men may do things 
in themselves just and yet not be just men (for in- 
stance, when men do what the laws require of them, 
cither against their will, or by reason of ignorance 
or something else, at all events not for the sake of 
the tilings themselves), and yet they do what they 
ought and all that the good man should do ; so it 
seems that to bo a good man one must do each act 
in a particular frame of mind, that is, from deliberate 
Choice and for the sake of the things themselves 
which are done. Now it is Virtue which makes 
out that Choice right, but the means required to carry 
the Choice comes under the province not of 
Virtue but of a different faculty. We must halt, 
as it were, awhile, and speak more clearly on these 
points. 

There is then a certain faculty, commonly named 
Cleverness, of such a nature as to be able to do and 
attain whatever conduces to any given purpose. Now 
if that purpose be a good one the faculty is praise- 
worthy ; if otherwise, it is called unscrupulousness 



3 This is another case of an observation being thrown 
in oliter, not relevant to, but suggested by, the matter in 
hand. 



CHAP, xir ETHICS 18"> 

we accordingly describe as ' Clever', both the Practically 
Wise and also the unscrupulous. 

Now Practical Wisdom is not identical with Clever- 
ness, though it pre-supposes this power of adapting 
means to ends : but this Eye of the Soul (as we may 
call it) does not attain its proper state without good- 
ness, as we have said before and as is quite plain, 
because the syllogisms into which Moral Action may 
be analysed have for their Major Premise, ' since 
is the End and the Chief Good ' (fill up the 
blank with just anything you please, for we merely 
want to exhibit the Form, so that anything will do), 
but how this blank should be filled is seen only by 
the good man : because Vice distorts the moral vision 
and causes men to be deceived in respect of practical 
principles. 4 

It is clear, therefore, that a man cannot be a Prac- 
tically-Wise, without being a good, man. 

We must enquire again also about Virtue : for it 
may be divided into Natural Virtue and Matured, 
which two bear to each other a relation similiar to 
that which Practical Wisdom bears to Cleverness, one 
not of identity but of resemblance. I speak of Natural 
Virtue, because men hold that each of the moral dis- 
positions attaches to us all somehow by nature : we 
have dispositions towards justice, self-mastery and 
courage, for instance, immediately from our birth. 
But still we seek Goodness in its highest sense as 
something distinct from these, and that these disposi- 
tions should attach to us in a somewhat different 
fashion. Children and brutes have these natural 
states, but then they are plainly hurtful unless com- 
bined with an intellectual element. At least thus 
much is matter of actual experience and observation, 
that as a strong body destitute of sight must, if set 
in motion, fall violently because it has not sight, so 

4 ' Look asquint on the face of truth.' Sir T. Browne, 
Rdigio Medici. 



180 ARISTOTLE'S P.OOK n 

it is also in the case we are considering, but, if it 
can get the intellectual element, it then excels in 
acting. Just so the Natural State of Virtue, being like 
this strong body, will then be Virtue in the highest 
sense when it too is combined with the intellectual 
element. 

So that, as in the 'case of the Calculating faculty, 
there are two forms, Cleverness and Practical Wisdom, 
so also in the case of the Moral there are two, Natural 
Virtue and Matured ; and of these the latter cannot 
be formed without Practical Wisdom. 

This leads some to say that all the Virtues are forms 
of Practical Wisdom, and Socrates was partly right 
in his inquiry and partly wrong : wrong in that he 
thought all the Virtues were merely forms of Practical 
Wisdom, right in saying they were not independent 
of that faculty. 

A proof of which is that now all, in defining Virtue, 
having spoken of its field and its relations, add on the 
' state which is accordant with Right Reason ' : now 
' right ' means in accordance with Practical Wisdom. 
So then all seem to have an instinctive notion that 
that state which is in accordance with Practical Wis- 
dom is Virtue. However we must make a slight 
change in their statement, because that state is Virtue, 
not merely which is in accordance with, but which 
implies, the possession of Right Reason ; which, upon 
such matters, is Practical Wisdom. The difference 
between us and Socrates is this : he thought the 
Virtues were reasoning processes (i.e. that they were 
all instances of Knowledge in its strict sense), but we 
say they imply the possession of Reason. 

From what has been said, then, it is clear that one 
cannot be, strictly speaking, good without Practical 
Wisdom, nor Practically-Wise without moral goodness. 

And by the distinction between Natural and Matured 
Virtue one can meet the reasoning by which it might 
be argued ' that the Virtues are separable because the 
same man is not by nature most inclined to all at once, 



CHAP, xii ETHICS 187 

so that he -will have acquired this one before he has 
that other '. We would reply that this is possible with 
respect to the Natural Virtues but not with respect 
to those in right of which a man is denominated simply 
good : because they will all belong to him together 
with the one faculty of Practical Wisdom. 

It is plain too that even had it not been apt to act 
we should have needed it, because it is the Excellence 
of a part of the Soul ; and that the moral Choice can- 
not be right independently of Practical Wisdom and 
Moral Goodness ; because this gives the right End, 
that causes the doing these things which conduce to 
the End. 

Then again, it is not master of Wisdom (i.e. of the 
superior part of the Soul), just as neither is the healing 
art master of health ; for it does not make use of it, 
but looks how it may come to be : so it commands 
for the sake of it, but does not command it. 

The objection is, in fact, about as valid as if a man 
should say the science of government governs the gods 
because it gives orders about all tilings in the com- 
munity. 



BOOK VII ' 
CHAPTER I 

Prefatory 

NEXT we must take a different point to start from, 1 
and observe that of what is to be avoided in respect of 
moral character there are three forms ; Vice, Im- 
perfect Self-Control, 2 and Brutishness. Of the two 
former it is plain what the contraries are, for wo call 
the one Virtue, the other Self-Control ; and as answer- 
ing to Brutishness it will be most suitable to assign 
Superhuman, i.e. heroical and godlike, Virtue, as, in 
Homer, Priam says of Hector ' that he was very 
excellent, nor was he like the offspring of mortal man, 
but of a god ' : and so, if, as is commonly said, men 
are raised to the position of gods by reason of very high 
excellence in Virtue, the state opposed to the Brutish 
will plainly be of this nature. As brutes are not vir- 
tuous or vicious, so neither are gods ; but the state of 
these is something more precious than Virtue, of the 
former something different in kind from Vice. 

And as, on the one hand, it is a rare thing for a 
man to be godlike (a term the Lacedaemonians are 
accustomed to use when they admire a man exceed- 
ingly ; creFos dvyp they call him), so the Brutish man is 
rare ; the character is found most among barbarians, 
and some cases of it are caused by disease or maiming ; 
also such men as exceed in vice all ordinary measures 
we therefore designate by this opprobrious term. Well, 

1 The account of Virtue and Vice hitherto given repre- 
sents rather what men may be than what they are. In this 
book we take a practical view of Virtue and Vice, in their 
ordinary, everyday, development. 

2 Or ' Incontinence '. Weakness of the Will is meant. 

-[ED.] 

188 



CHAP, i ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS 189 

we must in a subsequent place make some mention 
of this disposition, and Vice has been spoken of before : 
for the present we must speak of Imperfect Self-Control 
and its kindred faults of Softness and Luxury, on the 
one hand, and of Self-Control and Endurance on the 
other ; for we are to conceive of them, not as being 
the same states exactly as Virtue and Vice respectively, 
nor again as differing in kind. 

And we should adopt the same course as before, i.e. 
state the phenomena, and, after raising and discussing 
difficulties which suggest themselves, then exhibit, if 
possible, all the opinions afloat respecting these affec- 
tions of the moral character ; or, if not all, the greater 
part and the most important : for we may consider 
we have illustrated the matter sufficiently when the 
difficulties have been solved, and such theories as are 
most approved are left as a residuum. 

The chief points 3 may be thus enumerated. It is 
thought : 

I. That Self-Control and Endurance belong to the 
class of things good and praiseworthy, while Imperfect 
Self-Control and Softness belong to that of tilings low 
and blameworthy. 

II. That the man of Self-Control is identical with 
the man who is apt to abide by his resolution, and 
the man of Imperfect Self-Control with him who is 
apt to depart from his resolution. 

III. That the man of Imperfect Self-Control does 
things at the instigation of his passions, knowing them 
to be wrong, while the man of Self-Control, knowing 

3 It may be well to repeat here the translations of these 
technical terms which are now generally accepted : 
' Man of Self Control ' = ' Continent man ', ' Man of Im- 
perfect Self Control ' = ' Incontinent man ', ' Man of 
Perfected Self Mastery ' ' Temperate man', 'Practical 
Wisdom ' = ' Prudence '. 

The Incontinent is he who cannot resist an impulse to 
something which ho knows to be wrong. [Eo.j 



190 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vn 

his lusts to be wrong, refuses, by the influence of reason, 
to follow their suggestions. 

IV. That the Man of Perfected Self-Mastery unites 
the qualities of Sclf-Control and Endurance, and some 
say that everyone who unites these is a man of Perfect 
Self -Mastery, others do not. 

V. Some confound the two characters of the man 
who has no Self-Control, and the man of Imperfect 
Self-Control, while others distinguish between them. 

VI. It is sometimes said that the man of Practical 
Wisdom cannot be a man of Imperfect Self-Control, 
sometimes that men who are Practically Wise and 
Clever are of Imperfect Self-Control. 

VII. Again, men are said to be of Imperfect Self- 
Control in respect of anger, honour, and gain. 

These then are pretty well the common statements. 



CHAPTER II 

Questions raised, and slightly discussed 

Now a man may raise a question as to the nature 
of the right conception in violation of which a man 
fails of Self-Control. 

That he can so fail when Icnoiving in the strict sense 
what is right some say is impossible : for it is a strange 
thing, as Socrates thought, that while Knowledge is 
present in his mind something else should master him 
and drag him about like a slave. Socrates in fact 
contended generally against the theory, maintaining 
there is no such state as that of Imperfect Self-Control, 
for that no one acts contrary to what is best, conceiving 
it to be best, but by reason of ignorance what is best. 

With all due respect to Socrates, his account of the 
matter is at variance with plain facts, and we must- 
enquire with respect to the passion, if it be caused by 
ignorance, what is the nature of the ignorance : for 
that the man so failing does not suppose his acts to 



CHAP, n ETHICS 191 

be right before he is under the influence of passion la 
quite plain. 1 

There are people who partly agree with Socrates 
and partly not. That nothing can be stronger than 
Knowledge they agree, but that no man acts in con- 
travention of his conviction of what is better they do 
not agree ; and so they say that it is not Knowledge, 
but only Opinion, which the man in question has when 
he vielos to the instigation of his pleasures. 

fiut then, if it is Opinion and not Knowledge, that 
is if the oppressing conception be not strong, but only 
mild (as in the case of real doubt), the not abiding by 
it in the face of strong lusts would be excusable : but 
wickedness is not excusable, nor is anything so which 
deserves blame. 

Well then, is it Practical Wisdom which in this case 
offers opposition : for that is the strongest principle ? 
The supposition is absurd, for we shall Tiave the same 
man uniting Practical Wisdom and Imperfect Self- 
Control, and surely no single person would maintain 
that it is consistent with the character of Practical 
Wisdom to do voluntarily what is very wrong ; and 
besides we have shown before that the very mark of 
a man of this character is aptitude to act, as distin- 
guished from mere knowledge of what is right ; because 
he is a man conversant with particular details, and 
possessed of all the other virtues. 

Again, if the having strong and bad lusts is necessary 
to the idea of the man of Self-Control, this character 
cannot be identical with tl.e man of Perfected Self- 
Mastery, because the having strong desires or bad 
ones does not enter into the idea of this latter char- 
acter : and yet the man of Self-Control must have 
such. For suppose them good ; then the moral state 
which should hinder a man from following their sug- 
gestions must be bad, and so Self-Control would not 



1 This illustrates the expression ' Lficcit-3 of the Flesh '. 



192 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vn 

be in all cases good : suppose them oa tho other hand 
to be weak and not wrong, it would be nothing grand ; 
nor anything great, supposing them to be wrong and 
weak. 

Again, if Self-Control makes a man apt to abide by 
all opinions without exception, it may be bad, as 
suppose the case of a false opinion : and if Imperfect 
Self-Control makes a man apt to depart from all 
without exception, we shall have cases where it will 
be good. Take that of Neoptolemus in the Philodetes 
of Sophocles, for instance : he is to be praised for not 
abiding by what he was persuaded to by Ulysses, 
because he was pained at being guilty of false- 
hood. 

Or again, the typical sophistic argument presents a 
difficulty (for because men wish to prove paradoxes 
that they may be counted clever when they succeed, 
tho reasoning that has been used becomes a difficulty : 
for the intellect is fettered ; a man being unwilling to 
abide by the conclusion because it does not please his 
judgment, but unable to advance because he cannot 
disentangle the web of sophistical reasoning). Thus 
it is argued that folly joined with Imperfect Self- 
Control may turn out, in a given case, goodness : for 
by reason of his imperfect self-control a man may 
act in a way which contradicts his notions ; now his 
notion is that what is really good is bad and ought 
not to be done ; and so he will eventually do what is 
good and not what is bad. 

Again, on the same supposition, the man who, act- 
ing on conviction, pursues and chooses things because 
they are pleasant must be thought a better man than 
ho who does so not by reason of a quasi -rational con- 
viction but of Imperfect Self-Control : because he is 
more open to cure by reason of the possibility of his 
receiving a contrary conviction. But to the man of 
Imperfect Self-Control would apply the proverb ' when 
water chokes what should a man drink then ? ', for 
had he never been convinced at all in respect of what 



CHAP, m ETHICS 193 

he does, 2 then by a conviction in a contrary direction 
he might have stopped in his course ; but now, though 
he has had convictions, he notwithstanding acts against 
them. 

Again, if any and everything is the object-matter 
of Imperfect and Perfect Self-Control, who is the man 
of Imperfect Self-Control simply ? because no one 
unites all cases of it, and yet we commonly say that 
Borne men are so simply, not adding any particular 
thing in which they are so. 

Well, the difficulties raised are pretty near such .as 
I have described them, and of these theories we must 
remove some and leave others as established ; because 
the solving of a difficulty is a positive act of establishing 
something as true. 

CHAPTER III 

Of the object-matter of Sdf-Control. Of the nature of 
the conviction against, which the man of Imperfect Self- 
Control acts [i.e. Incontinence, compared with Con- 
tinence and Profligacy] 

Now we must examine first whether men of Im- 
perfect Self-Control act with a knowledge of what is 
right or not : next, if with such knowledge, in what 
sense ; and nest what are we to assume is the object- 
matter of the man of Imperfect Self-Control, and of 
the man of Self-Control (I mean, whether pleasure and 
pain of all kinds or certain definite ones) ; and as to 
Self-Control and Endurance, whether these are designa- 
tions of the same character or not. And in like 
manner we must go into all questions which are con- 
nected with the present. 

2 Another reading omits the /J.T] : the meaning of the 
whole passage would be exactly the same : it would then 
run, ' If he had been convinced of the lightness of what 
he does, i.e. if lie were now acting on conviction, he might 
stop in his course on a change of conviction.' 



194 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vn 

But the real starting-point of the enquiry is, whether 
the two characters of Self-Control and Imperfect Self- 
Control are distinguished by their object-matter, or 
their respective relations to it. I mean, whether the 
man of Imperfect Self-Control is such simply by virtue 
of having it in such and such object-matter ; or not, 
but by virtue of his being related to it in such and 
such a way, or by virtue of both : next, whether Self- 
Control and Imperfect Self-Control are unlimited in 
their object- matter : because he who is designated 
without any addition a man of Imperfect Self-Control 
is not unlimited in his object-matter, but has exactly 
the same as the man who has lost all Self-Control : 
nor is he so designated because of his relation to this 
object-matter merely (for then his character would be 
identical with that just mentioned, loss of all Self- 
Control), but because of his relation to it being such 
and such. For the man who has lost all Self-Control 
is led on with deliberate choice, holding that it is his 
line to pursue pleasure as it rises : while the man of 
Imperfect Self-Control does not think that he ought 
to pursue it, but does pursue it all the same. 

Now as to the notion that it is True Opinion, and 
not Knowledge, in contravention of which men fail 
in Self-Control, it makes no difference to the point 
in question, because some of those who merely hold 
Opinions have no doubt about them but suppose them- 
selves to have accurate Knowledge. If then it is 
urged that men holding Opinions will be more likely 
than men who have Knowledge to act in contravention 
of their conceptions, as having but a moderate belief 
in them, we reply, Knowledge will not differ in this 
respect from Opinion ; some men believe their own 
Opinions no less firmly than others do their positive 
Knowledge. Heraclitus 1 is a case in point. 

Rather the following is the account of it. The term 

1 Referring to Heraclitus' doctrine of ' Conviction ' as 
strong belief. [Eo.] 



CHAP, m ETHICS 195 

knowing has two senses ; both the man who does not 
use his Knowledge, and lie who does, are said to know: 
there will be a difference between a man's acting 
wrongly, who though possessed of Knowledge does 
not call it into operation, and his doing so who has i 
and actually exercises it : the latter [i.e. the man 
whose Knowledge is not dormant and who yet acts 
against it. ED.] is a strange case, but the mere having 
without exercising, presents no anomaly. 

Again, as there are two kinds of propositions affect- 
ing action, 2 universal and particular, there is no 
reason why a man may not act against his Knowledge 
having both propositions in his mind, using the uni- 
versal but not the particular, for the particulars are 
the objects of moral action. 

There is a difference also in universal propositions 3 ; 
a universal proposition may relate partly to a man's 
self and partly to the thing in question. Take the 
following for instance, ' dry food is good for every 
man '. This may have the two minor premises, ' this 
is a man ', and ' so and so is dry food ' ; but whether 
a given substance is so and so, a man either has not 
the Knowledge or does not exert it. According to 
these different senses there will be an immense differ- 
ence, so that for a man to know in the one sense, and 
yet act wrongly, would be nothing strange, but in 
any of the other senses it would be a matter for 
wonder. 

Again, men may have Knowledge in a way different 
from any of those which have been now stated : for 
we constantl}- see a man's state so differing by having 
and not using Knowledge, that he has it in a sense and 
also has not ; when a man is asleep, for instance, or 
mad, or drunk. Well, men under the actual operation 
of passion are in exactly similar conditions ; for anger, 

2 Major and minor premises of the practical syllogism. 

3 Some necessarily implying knowledge of the par- 
ticular, others not. 



196 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vn 

lust, and some other such-like things, manifestly make 
changes even in the body, and in some they even cause 
madness. It is plain then that we must say the men 
of Imperfect Self-Control are in a state similar to 
these. 

And their saying what embodies Knowledge is no 
proof of their actually then exercising it, because they 
who are under the operation of these passions repeat 
demonstrations or verses of Empedocles, 4 just as 
children, when first learning, string words together, 
but as yet know nothing of their meaning, because 
they must grow into it and this is a process requiring 
time : so that we must suppose these men who fail in 
Self-Control to repeat words (or ' tags ') just as actors 
do. 

Furthermore, a man may look at the account of 
the phenomenon in the following way, from an 
examination of the actual working of the mind. All 
action may be analysed into a syllogism, in which the 
one premise is a universal maxim and the other 
concerns particulars of which Sense is cognizant : 
now when one judgment results from these two, it 
follows necessarily that, as far as theory goes the mind 
must assert the conclusion, and in practical propositions 
the man must act accordingly. 

For instance, let the universal be, ' All that is sweet 
should be tasted ', the particular, ' This is sweet ' ; 
it follows necessarily that he who is able and is not 
hindered should not only draw, but put in practice, 
the conclusion ' This is to be tasted '. When then there 
is in the mind one universal proposition forbidding 
to taste, and the other ' All that is sweet is pleasant ' 
with its minor ' This is sweet ' (which is the one that 
really works), and desire happens to be in the man, 
the first universal bids him avoid this but the desire 
leads him on to taste ; for it has the power of moving 

4 As a modern parallel, take old Trambull in Scott's 
Rcdgauntlct. 



CHAP, in ETHICS 197 

the various organs. So it results that he fails in Self- 
Control, in a certain sense under the influence of 
Reason and Opinion not in itself contrary to Reason 
but only accidentally so ; because it is the desire that 
is contrary to Right Reason, but not the Opinion 5 : 
and so for this reason brutes are not accounted of 
Imperfect Self-Control, because they have no power 
of conceiving universals but only of receiving and 
retaining particular impressions. 

As to the manner in which the ignorance is removed 
and the man of Imperfect Self-Control recovers his 
Knowledge, the account is the same as with respect 
to him who is drunk or asleep, and is not peculiar to 
this affection. So physiologists are the right people to 
apply to. But whereas the minor premise of every 
practical syllogism is an opinion on matter cognizable 
by Sense and determines the actions, he who is under 
the influence of passion either has not this, or so has 
it that his having does not amount to knowing but 
merely saying, as a man when drunk might repeat 
Empedocles' verses ; and because the minor term 

5 That is, as I understand it, either the major or the 
minor premise : it is true, that ' All that is sweet is pleas- 
ant ' ; it is true also, that ' This is sweet ' : what is contrary 
to Right Reason is the bringing in this minor to the major, 
i.e. the universal maxim, forbidding to taste. Thus ; a 
man goes to a convivial meeting with the maxim in his 
mind ' All excess is to be avoided ' ; at a certain time 
his Sense tells him ' This glass is excess '. As a matter 
of mere reasoning, he cannot help receiving the conclusion 
' This glass is to be avoided ' : and supposing him to be 
morally sound he would accordingly abstain. But appe- 
tite, being a simple tendency towards indulgence, suggests, 
in place of the minor premise, ' This is excess ', its own 
premise, ' This is sweet ' ; this again, suggests the self- 
indulgent maxim or principle ('Apxy,) ' All that is sweet 
is to be tasted ', and so, by strict logical sequence, proves 
' This glass is to be tasted '. 

6 '6pov. Aristotle's own account of this word (Prior 



198 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vn 

is neither universal, nor is thought to have the power 
of producing Knowledge in like manner as the uni- 
versal term. And so the result which Socrates was 
seeking comes out, that is to say, the affection does 
not take place in the presence of that which is thought 
to be specially and properly Knowledge, nor is this 
dragged about by reason of the affection, but in the 
presence of that Knowledge which is conveyed by Sense. 
Let this account then be accepted of the question 
respecting the failure in Self-Control, whether it is 
with Knowledge or not ; and, if with knowledge, with 
what kind of knowledge such failure is possible. 



CHAPTER IV 

Of the character designated simply by the term 'Of Im- 
perfect Selj-Control '. Of those so designated, with 
the addition of the particular Object-Matter 

THE next question to be discussed is whether there 
is a character to be designated by the term ' of Im- 
perfect Self-Control ' simply, or whether all who are 
so are to be accounted such, in respect of some par- 
ticular thing ; and, if there is such a character, what 
is his object-matter. 

Now that pleasures and pains are the object-matter 
of men of Self-Control and of Endurance, and also 
of men of Imperfect Self-Control and Softness, is plain. 

Further, things which produce pleasure are either 
necessary, or objects of choice in themselves but yet 
admitting of excess. All bodily things which pro- 
duce pleasure are necessary ; and I call such those 
which relate to food and other grosser appetites, in 
short such bodily things as we assumed were the 



Anali/L ii, 1) is els ov diaXverai ?'? Trporacns ; but both in 
the account of vous and hero it seems that the proposition 
itself is really indicated by it. 



CHAP, iv ETHICS 199 

Object-matter of absence of Self-Control and of Per- 
fected Self-Mastery. 

The other class of objects are not necessary, but 
objects of choice in themselves I mean, for instance, 
victory, honour, wealth, and such-like good or plea- 
sant things. And those who are excessive in their 
liking for such things contrary to the principle of 
Right Reason which is in their own breasts we do not 
designate men of Imperfect Self-Control simply, but 
with the addition of the thing wherein, as in respect of 
money, or gain, or honour, or anger, and not simply ; 
because we consider them as different characters and 
only having that title in right of a kind of resemblance 
(as we saw that the Olympic victor was both a man 
and also Man by name the generic name being practi- 
cally identical with his proper name 1 ). And a proof 
of the real difference between these so designated with 
an addition and those simply so called is this, that 
Imperfect Self-Control is blamed, not as an error 
merely but also as being a vice, either wholly or par- 
tially ; but none of these other cases is so blamed. 

But of those who have for their object -matter the 
bodily enjoyments, which we say are also the object- 
matter of the man of Perfected Self -Mastery and the 
man who has lost all Self-Control, he that pursues 
excessive pleasures and too much avoids - things 



1 See Burnet's note. From an Oxyrhynchus Papyrus, 
communicated by Dr. B. P. Grenfell to the Classical 
Review (July 1899), it appears that there was in the 
middle of the fifth century B.C. an Olympic victor whose 
name was "A^JCOTTOS (Gk. for ' man '). Thus the almost 
unanimous testimony of the Greek commentators seems 
to be confirmed, that the above is the correct rendering 
of an otherwise unsatisfactory passage. [ED.] 

2 The Greek would give ' avoids excessive pain ', but 
this is not true, for the excess of pain would be around 
for excuse : the warrant for translating as in the text, 13 
the passage occurring just below, p. '200, 1. 21. 



200 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vn 

which are painful (as hunger and thirst, heat and 
cold, and everything connected with touch and taste), 
not from moral choice but in spite of his moral choice 
and intellectual conviction, is termed ' a man of Im- 
perfect Self-Control ', not with the addition of any 
particular object-matter as we do in respect of want 
of control of anger, but simply. 

And a proof that the term is thus applied is that 
the kindred term ' Soft ' is used in respect of the 
enjoyments but not in respect of any of those others. 
And for this reason we group together the man of 
Imperfect Self-Control, the man who has lost it entirely, 
the man who has it, and the man of Perfected Self- 
Mastery ; but not any of those other characters, 
because the former have for their object-matter the 
same pleasures and pains : but though they have the 
same object-matter, they are not related to it in the 
same way, but two of them act in accordance with 
moral choice, two without it. And so we should say 
that man is more truly a profligate who pursues ex- 
cessive pleasures, and avoids moderate pains, being 
either not at all, or at least but little, urged by desire, 
than the man who does so because his desire is very 
strong : because we think what would the former be 
likely to do if he had the additional stimulus of youth- 
ful lust and violent pain consequent on the want of 
those pleasures which we have denominated necessary 
[i.e. natural] ? 

Well then, since of desires and pleasures there are 
some which are in kind honourable and good (because 
things pleasant are divisible, as we said before, into 
such as are naturally objects of choice, such as are 
naturally objects of avoidance, and such as are in 
themselves indifferent, money, gain, honour, victory, 
for instance) ; in respect of all such and those that 
are indiil'erent, men are blamed not merely for being 
affected by, or desiring, or liking them, but for exceeding 
in any way in these feelings. 

And so they are blamed, whosoever in spite of 



CHAP, iv ETHICS 201 

Reason are mastered by, that is pursue, any object, 
though in its nature noble and good; they, for in- 
stance, who are more earnest than they should be 
respecting honour, or their children or parents. Not 
but what these are good objects and men are praised 
for being earnest about them: but still they admit 
of excess; for instance, if any one, as Niobe did, 
should fight even against the gods, or feel towards 
his father as Satyrus, 3 who got therefrom the nick- 
name of Philopator, because he was thought to be 
very foolish. 

Now depravity there is none in regard of these 
things, for the reason assigned above, that each of 
them in itself is a thing naturally choiceworthy, 
yet the excesses in respect of them are wrong and 
matter for blame. And similarly there is no Im- 
perfect Self -Control in respect of these things; that 
being not merely a thing that should be avoided but 
blameworthy. 

But because of the resemblance of the affection 
to the Imperfection of Self -Control the term is used 
with the addition in each case of the particular 
object-matter, just as men call a man a bad physician, 
or a bad actor, whom they would not think of calling 
simply bad. As then in these cases we do not apply 
the term simply because each of the states is not 
a vice, but only like a vice in the way of analogy, so 
it is plain that in respect of Imperfect Self -Control 
and Self-Control we must limit the names of those 
states which have the same object-matter as Perfected 
Self -Mastery and Profligacy, and that we do apply it 
to the case of anger only in the way of resemblance: 
for which reason, with an addition, we designate a man 
of Imperfect Self-Control in respect of anger, as of 
honour or of gain. 

u It seems probable that Satyrus was a fourth century 
Bosporan king who deified his dead father. [ED.] 



202 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vn 

CHAPTER V 
Of the. Brutish states 

As there are some things naturally pleasant, and of 
these two kinds (those, namely, which are pleasant 
generally, and those which are so relatively to parti- 
cular kinds of animals and men), so there are others 
which are not naturally pleasant but which come to 
be so in consequence either of physical injury, or 
custom, or depraved natural tastes; and one may 
observe moral states similar to those we have been 
speaking of, having respectively these classes of things 
for their object-matter. 

I mean, for instance the Brutish [or Bestial], as in 
the case of the female who, they say, would rip up 
women with child and eat the foetus; or the tastes 
which are found among the savage tribes bordering on 
the Pontus, 1 some liking raw flesh, and some being 
cannibals, and some lending one another their children 
to make feasts of ; or the story of Phalaris. These 
are instances of Brutish states, but others are caused 
in some by disease or madness ; take, for instance, the 
man who sacrificed and ate his mother, or him who 
devoured the liver of his fellow-servant. Instances 
again of those caused by disease or by custom would 
be, plucking out of hair, or eating one's nails, or eating 
coals and earth. Now wherever nature is really the 
cause, no one would think of calling such men of 
Imperfect Self -Control, nor in like manner, such as are 
in a diseased state through indulgence. 

Obviously the having any of these inclinations is 
something foreign to what is denominated Vice, just 
as Brutishness is : and when a man has them his 
mastering them is not properly Self-Control, nor his 

1 So Herodotus (iv. 18, 106) speaks of Scythian ' rnan- 
caters '. [ED.] 



CHAP, vi ETHICS 203 

being mastered by them Imperfection of Self-Control 
in the proper sense, but only in the way of resem- 
blance ; just as we may say a man of ungovernable 
wrath fails of Self-Control in respect of anger but not 
simply fails of Self-Control. For all excessive folly, 
cowardice, absence of Self-Control, or irritability, are 
either Brutish or morbid. The man, for instance, who 
is naturally afraid of all things, even if a mouse should 
stir, is cowardly after a Brutish sort [i.e. beneath what 
is human] ; there was a man again who. by reason of 
disease, was afraid of a cat. And of irrational beings, 
they who are naturally destitute of Reason and live 
only by Sense are Brutish, as are some tribes of the 
far off barbarians, while others who are so by reason 
of diseases, epileptic or insane, are in morbid states. 

So then, of these inclinations, a man may sometimes 
merely have one without yielding to it : I mean, 
suppose that Phalaris had restrained his unnatural 
desire to eat a child : or he may both have and yield 
to it. As then Vice when such as belongs to human 
nature is called Vice simply, while the other is so 
called with the addition of brutish' or 'morbid', but 
not simply Vice, so manifestly there is Brutish and 
Morbid Imperfection of Self -Control, but that alone 
is entitled to the name without any qualification which 
is of the nature of Profligacy, as it is found in man. 



CHAPTER VI 

Imperfect Self-Control (simply), compared with Imperfect 
Self-Control in respect of Anger 

IT is plain then that the object-matter of Imperfect 
Self-Control and Self-Control i? restricted to the same 
as that of utter absence of Self-Control and that of 
Perfected Self-Mastery, and that the rest is the object- 
matter of a different species so named metaphorically 
and not simply. We will now examine the position, 



204 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vn 

'That Imperfect Self-Control in respect of Anger is 
less disgraceful than that in respect of Lusts '. 

In the first place, it seems that Anger does in a way 
listen to Reason but mishears it, as quick servants 
who run out before they have heard the whole of 
what is said and then mistake the order, or as dogs, 
again, bark at the slightest stir, before they have seen 
whether it be friend or foe. Just so Anger, by reason 
of its natural heat and quickness, listening to Reason, 
but without having heard the command of Reason, 
rushes to its revenge. That is to say Reason or some 
impression on the mind shows there is insolence or 
contempt in the offender, and then Anger, reasoning 
as it were that one ought to fight against what is such, 
fires up immediately ; whereas Lust, if Reason or 
Sense, as the case may be, merely says a thing is 
sweet, rushes to the enjoyment of it. And so Anger 
follows Reason in a manner, but Lust does not and is 
therefore more disgraceful, because he that cannot 
control his anger yields in a manner to Reason, but the 
other to his Lust and not to Reason at all. 

Again, a man is more excusable for following such 
desires as are natural, just as he is for following such 
Lusts as are common to all and to that degree in which 
they are common. Now Anger and Irritability are 
more natural than Lusts when in excess and for objects 
not necessary. (This was the ground of the defence 
the man made who beat his father. ' My father,' he 
said, ' used to beat his, and his father his again, and 
this little fellow here,' pointing to his child, ' will beat 
me when he is grown a man : it runs in the family.' 
And the father, as he was being dragged along, bid 
his son leave off beating him at the door, because he 
had himself been used to drag his father so far and 
no further.) 

Again, characters are less unjust in proportion as 
they involve less insidiousness. Now the Angry man 
is not insidious, nor is Anger, but quite open. But 
Lust is : so they say of Venus : 



CHAP, vi ETHICS 205 

' Cyprus-born Goddess, u-eavtr of deceits' . 
Or Homer of the girdle called the Cestus: 

' Persuasiveness cheating e'en the subtlest mind ' 

And so since the kind of Imperfect Self-Control is 
more unjust, it is also more disgraceful than that in 
respect of Anger, and is simply Imperfect Self-Control, 
and Vice in a certain sense. 

Again, no man feels pain in being insolent, but 
every one who acts through Anger does act with 
pain; and he who acts insolently does it with 
pleasure. If then those things are most unjust with 
which we have most right to be angry, then Imperfect 
Self-Control, arising from Lust, is more so than that 
arising from Anger: because in Anger there is no 
insolence. 1 

Well then, it is clear that Imperfect Self-Control in 
respect of Lusts is more disgraceful than that in 
respect of Anger, and that the object-matter of Self- 
Control, and the Imperfection of it, are bodily Lusts 
and pleasures ; but of these last we must take into 
account the differences ; for, as was said at the com- 
mencement, some are proper to the human race and 
natural both in kind and degree, others Brutish, and 
others caused by injury and disease. 



1 The reasoning here being somewhat obscure from the 
conciseness of expression, the following exposition of it is 
subjoined. 

Actions of Lust are wrong actions done with pleasure, 
Wrong actions done with pleasure are more justly 

objects of wrath *, 
Such as are more justly objects of wrath are more 

unjust, 
.-.Actions of Lust are more unjust. 

* i ; /3/HS is introduced as the single instance from which 
this premise is proved inductively. See the account of it 
in Rhetoric n, 2. 



206 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vii 

Now the first of these only are the object-matter 
of Perfected Self-Mastery and utter absence of Self- 
Control; and therefore we never attribute either of 
these states to Brutes (except metaphorically, and 
whenever any one kind of animal differs entirely from 
another in insolence, misehievousness, or voracity), 
because they have not moral choice or process of 
deliberation, but are quite different from that kind of 
creature just as are madmen from other men. 

Brutishness is not so low in the scale as Vice, yet it is 
more horrible; because it is not that the highest principle 
has been corrupted, as in the human creature, but the 
subject has it not at all. 

It is much the same, therefore, as if one should 
compare an inanimate with an animate being, which 
were the worse; for the badness of that which has 
no principle of origination is always less harmful ; 
and Reason is a principle of origination. A similar 
case would be the comparing injustice and an unjust 
man cogether : for in different ways each is the 
worse : a bad man would produce ten thousand times 
as much harm as a bad brute. 



CHAPTER VII 

An enumeration and description 'of the various characters 
(taking in the idea of pains as well as pleasures) 

Now with respect to the pleasures and pains which 
come to a man through Touch and Taste, and the 
desiring or avoiding such (which we determined 
before to constitute the object matter of the states 
of utter absence of Self-Control and Perfect Self- 
Mastery ), one may be so disposed as to yield to 
temptations to which most men would be superior, 
or to be superior to those to which most men would 
yield. In respect of pleasures, these characters will be 
respectively the man of Imperfect Self-Control, and 



CHAP. VIT ETHICS 207 

the man of Self-Control ; and, in respect of pains, the 
man of Softness and the man of Endurance; but 
the moral state of most men is something between 
the two, even though they lean somewhat to the 
worse characters. 

Again, since of the pleasures indicated some are 
necessary and some are not, others are so to a cer- 
tain degree but not the excess or defect of them, 
and similarly also of lusts and pains, the man who 
pursues the excess of pleasant things, or such as are 
in themselves excess, or from deliberate moral choice, 
for their own sake, and not for anything else which 
is to result from them, is a man utterly void of Self- 
Control: for he must be incapable of remorse, and 
so incurable, because he that has not remorse is 
incurable. (He that has too little love of pleasure 
is the opposite character, and the man of Perfected 
Self-Mastery the mean character.) He is of a similar 
character who avoids the bodily pains, not because 
he cannot, but because he chooses not to, withstand 
them. 

But of the characters who go wrong without 
deliberate purpose so to do, the one is led on by 
reason of pleasure, the other because he avoids the 
pain it would cost him to deny his lust ; and so 
they are different the one from the other. Now 
every one would pronounce a man worse for doing 
something base without any impulse of desire, or with 
a very slight one, than for doing the same from the 
impulse of a very strong desire ; for striking a man 
when not angry than if he did so in wrath : because 
one naturally says, ' What would he have done had 
he b?en under the influence of passion 1 ' (and on 
this ground, by the by, the man utterly void of 
Self-Control is worse than he who has it imperfectly). 
However, of the two characters which have been 
mentioned [as included in that of utter absence of 
Self-Control], the one is rather Softness, the other 
properly the man of no Self-Control [i.e. Profligate]. 



208 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vii 

Furthermore, to the character of Imperfect Self- 
Control is opposed that of Self-Control, and to that 
of Softness that of Endurance: because Endurance 
consists in continued resistance but Self-Control in 
actual mastery, and continued resistance and actual 
mastery are as different as not being conquered is 
from conquering ; and so Self-Control is more choice- 
worthy than Endurance. 

Again, he who fails when exposed to those tempta- 
tions against which the common run of men hold out, 
and are well able to do so, is Soft and Luxurious 
(Luxury being a kind of Softness) : the kind of man, 
I mean, to let his robe drag in the dirt to avoid the 
trouble of lifting it, and who, aping the sick man, 
does not however suppose himself wretched though 
he is like a wretched man. So it is too with respect 
to Self-Control and the imperfection of it: if a man 
yields to pleasures or pains which are violent and 
excessive it is no matter for wonder, but rather for 
allowance if he made what resistance he could. In- 
stances are, Philoctetes (in Theodectes' drama) when 
wounded by the viper; or Cercyon in the Alope of 
Carcinus, or men who in trying to suppress laughter 
burst into a loud continuous fit of it, as happened, 
you remember, to Xenophantus. But it is a matter 
for wonder when a man yields to and cannot contend 
against those pleasures or pains which the common 
b/-rd are able to resist; always supposing his failure 
not to be owing to natural constitution or disease, I 
mean, as the Scythian kings are constitutionally Soft, 
or the natural difference between the sexes. 

Again, the man who is a slave to amusement is 
commonly thought to be destitute of Self-Control, 
but he really is Soft; because amusement is an act 
of relaxing, being an act of resting, and the character 
in question is one of those who exceed due bounds in 
respect of this. 

Moreover of Imperfect Self-Control there are two 
forms, Precipitancy and Weakness : those who have 



CHAP, vu ETHICS 209 

it in the latter form though they have made reso- 
lutions do not abide by them by reason of passion; 
the others are led by passion because they have never 
formed any resolutions at all: while there are some 
who (like tho=e who by tickling themselves beforehand 
get rid of ticklishness), having felt and seen beforehand 
the approach of temptation, and roused up themselves 
and th^ir resolution, yield not to passion; whether 
the temptation be somewhat pleasant or somewhat 
painful. The Precipitate form of Imperfect Self-Con- 
trol they are most liable to who are constitutionally 
of a sharp or a melancholy temperament : because thev, 
the one by reason of the swiftness, the other by reason 
of the violence, of their passions, do not wait for 
Reason, because they are disposed to follow whatever 
notion is impressed upon their minds. 

Again, the man utterly destitute of Self-Control, 
as was observed before, is not given to remorse- 
for it is part of his character that he abides by his 
moral choice. But the man of Imperfect Self-Control 
is almost made up of remorse : and so the case is 
not as in the problem we quoted above, but the former 
is incurable and the latter may be cured. For Profligacy 
is like chronic diseases, dropsy and consumption for 
instance, but Imperfect Self-Control is like acute 
disorders: the former being a continuous evil, the 
latter not so. And. in fact, Imperfect Self-Control 
and Confirmed Vice are different in kind: the 
latter being imperceptible to its victim, the former 
not so. 

But, of the different forms of Imperfect Self-Con- 
trol, those are better who are carried off their feet 
by a sudden access of temptation than they who 
have Reason and do not abide by it ; these last being 
overcome by passion less in degree, and not wholly 
without premeditation as are the others: for the man 
of Imperfect Self-Control is like those who are soon 
intoxicated and by little wine, i.e. less than the com- 
mon run of men. 



210 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vn 

Well then, that Imperfection of Self-Control is not 
Confirmed Viciousness is plain : and yet perhaps it is 
such in a way, because the former is contrary to 
moral choice and the latter the result of it 1 : at all 
events, there is a similarity in respect of the actions, 
as Demodocus said of the Milesians, ' The people 
of Miletus are not fools, but they do just the kind 
of things that fools do.' And so they of Imperfect 
Self-Control are not unjust, but they do unjust acts. 

(But to resume.) The man of Imperfect Self- 
Control is of such a character as to follow bodily 
pleasures in excess and in defiance of Bight Reason, 
without acting on any deliberate conviction, whereas 
the man utterly destitute of Self-Control does act 
upon a conviction which rests on his natural in- 
clination to follow after these pleasures. The former, 
therefore, may be easily persuaded to a different 
course, but the latter not: for Virtue and Vice 
respectively preserve and corrupt the moral principle. 
Now the motive is the principle or starting point 
in moral actions, just as the hypothesis in mathe- 
matics: and neither in mornls nor mathematics is 
it Reason which is apt to teach the principle; but 
Excellence, either natural or acquired by custom, 
in holding right notions with respect to the principle. 
He who does this in morals is the man of Perfected 
Self -Mastery, and the contrary character is the man 
utterly destitute of Self-Control. 

Again, there is a character liable to be taken off 
his feet in defiance of Right Reason because of 
passion, whom passion so far masters as to prevent 

1 Before the time of trial comes the man deliberately 
makes his Moral Choice to act rightly ; but, at the moment 
of acting, the powerful strain of desire makes him con- 
travene this choice : his Will does not act in accordance 
with the affirmation or negation of his Reason. His 
actions are therefore of the mixed kind. See Bk. in, ch. i, 
aud note 5, on page 1(53. 



OHAP. vra ETHICS 211 

his acting in accordance with Right Reason, but not 
so far as to make him be convinced that it is his 
proper line to follow after such pleasures without 
limit. This character is the man of Imperfect Self- 
Control, better than he who is utterly destitute of it, 
and not a bad man simply and without qualification: 
because in him the highest and best part, i.e. prin- 
ciple, is preserved. And there is another character 
opposed to him who is apt to abide by his resolutions, 
and not to depart from them ; at all events, not at the 
instigation of passion. 

It is evident then from all this, that Self-Control 
is a good state and the Imperfection of it a bad one. 



CHAPTER VIII 

Of the relation which Steadfastness in Opinion, and the 
contrary, bear to Self-Control and Imperfect Self- 
Control respectively 

NEXT comes the question, whether a man is a 
man of Self-Control for abiding by his conclusions 
and moral choice be they of what kind they may, 
or only by the right one ; or again, a man of Im- 
perfect Self-Control for not abiding by his con- 
clusions and moral choice be they of whatever kind ; 
or, to put the case we did before, is he such for not 
abiding by false conclusions and wrong moral choice ? 

Is not this the truth, that incidentally it is by 
conclusions and moral choice of any kind that the 
one character abides and the other does not, but 
per se true conclusions and right moral choice 1 : to 
explain what is meant by incidatially, and per se; 

1 Let a man be punctual on principle to any one en- 
gagement in the day, and he must, as a matter of course, 
keep all his others in their due places relatively to this 
one, and so will often wear an appearance of being 
needlessly punctilious in trifles. 



212 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vii 

suppose a man chooses or pursues this thing for 
the sake of that, he is said to pursue and choose 
that per se, but this only incidentally. That is, if a 
man choose or pursue A for the sake of B, he chooses 
B ' essentially ' and A ' incidentally '. For the term 
per se we use commonly the word 'simply', and 
so, in a way, it is opinion of any kind soever by 
which the two characters respectively abide or not, 
but he is ' simply ' entitled to the designations who 
abides or not by the true opinion. 

There are also people, who have a trick of abiding 
by their own opinions, who are commonly called 
Obstinate, as they who are hard to be persuaded, and 
whoso convictions are not easily changed. Now these 
people bear some resemblance to the character of 
Self -Control, just as the prodigal to the liberal or 
the rash man to the brave, but they are different in 
many points. The man of Self-Control does not 
change by reason of passion and lust, yet when 
occasion so requires he will be easy of persuasion: 
but the Obstinate man changes not at the call of 
Reason, though many of this class take up certain 
desires and are led by their pleasures. Among the 
class of Obstinate are the Opinionated, the Ignorant, 
and the Bearish the first, from the motives of 
pleasure and pain : I mean, they have the pleasurable 
feeling of a kind of victory in not having their con- 
victions changed, and they are pained when their 
decrees, so to speak, are reversed; so that, in fact, 
they rather resemble the man of Imperfect Self- 
Control than the man of Self -Control. 

Again, there are some who depart from their 
resolutions not by reason of any Imperfection of 
Self-Control ; take, for instance, Neoptolemus in the 
Philuctetes of Sophocles. Here certainly pleasure 
was the motive of his departure from his resolution, 
but then it was one of a noble sort : for to be truthful 
\vas noble in his eyes and he had been persuaded by 
Odysseus to lie. 



CHAP. vs. ETHICS 213 

So it is not every one who acts from the motive of 
pleasure who is utterly destitute of Self-Control or 
base or of Imperfect Self-Control, only he who acts 
from the impulse of a base pleasure. 



CHAPTER IX 

Notes additional and supplementary. Points iv and 
vi touched upon 

MOREOVER as there is a character who takes less 
pleasure than he ought in bodily enjoyments, and he 
also fails to abide by the conclusion of his Reason, 1 
the man of Self-Control is the mean between him 
and the man of Imperfect Self-Control: that is to 
say, the latter fails to abide by them because of 
somewhat too much, the former because of some- 
what too little ; while the man of Self-Control abides 
by them, and never changes by reason of anything 
else than such conclusions. 

Now of course since Self-Control is good, both 
the contrary states must be bad, as indeed they 
plainly are: but because the one of them is seen in 
few persons, and but rarely in them, Self-Control 
comes to be viewed as if opposed only to the Imper- 
fection of it, just as Perfected Self-Mastery is thought 
to be opposed only to utter want of Self-Control. 

Again, as many terms are used in the way of 
similitude, so people have corne to talk of the Self- 
Control of the man of Perfected Self-Mastery in the 
way of similitude: for the man of Self-Control and 
the man of Perfected Self-Mastery have this in 
common that they do nothing against Right Reason 

1 Because he is destitute of these minor sprines of 
action, which are intended to supply the defects of tho 
higher principle. See Bp. Butler's first Sermon on 
' Compassion '. 



214 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK VTJ 

on the impulse of bodily pleasures, but then the 
former has bad desires, the latter not ; and the latter 
is so constituted as not even to feel pleasure contrary 
to Reason, while the former feels but does not yield 
to it. 

Like again are the man of Imperfect Self-Control 
and he who is utterly destitute of it, though in 
reality distinct: both follow bodily pleasures, but 
the latter under a notion that it is the proper line for 
him to take, the former without any such notion. 

And it is not possible for the same man to be at 
once a man of Practical Wisdom and of Imperfect 
Self-Control: because the character of Practical 
Wisdom includes, as we showed before, goodness 
of moral character. And again, it is not knowledge 
merely, but aptitude for action, which constitutes 
Practical Wisdom : and of this aptitude the man of 
Imperfect Self-Control is destitute. But there is no 
reason why the merely Clever man should not be of 
Imperfect Self-Control: and the reason why some 
men are occasionally thought to be men of Practical 
Wisdom, and yet of Imperfect Self-Control, is this, 
that Cleverness differs from Practical Wisdom in the 
way I stated in a former book, and is very near it so 
far as the intellectual element is concerned but differs 
by the absence of the moral choice. 

Nor is the man of Imperfect Self-Control like the 
man who both has and calls into exercise his know- 
ledge, but like the man who, having it, is overpowered 
by sleep or wine. Again, he acts voluntarily (because 
he knows, in a certain sense, what he does and the 
result of it), but he is not a confirmed bad man, for 
his moral choice is good, so he is at all events only 
half bad. Nor is he unjust, because he does not act 
with deliberate intent: for of the two chief forms 
of the character, the one is not apt to abide by his 
deliberate resolutions, and the other, the man of 
melancholic temperament, is not apt to deliberate 
at all. 



CHAP, rx ETHICS 215 

So in fact the man of Imperfect Self-Control is like 
a community which makes all proper enactments, and 
has admirable laws, only does not act on them, veri- 
fying the scoff of Anaxandrides : 

'That State did will it, which cares nought for laws;' 

whereas the bad man is like one which acts upon its 
laws, but then unfortunately they are bad ones. 

Imperfection of Self-Control and Self-Control, after 
all, are above the average state of men; because he 
of the latter character is more true to his Eeason, 
and the former less so, than is in the power of most 
men. 

Again, of the two forms of Imperfect Self-Control 
that is more easily cured which they have who are 
of melancholic temperament, than that of those 
who form resolutions and break them ; and they that 
are so through habituation than they that are so na- 
turally ; since of course custom is easier to change 
than nature, because the very resemblance of custom 
to nature is what constitutes the difficulty of changing 
it ; as Evenus says : 

' Practice, I say, my friend, doth long endure, 
And at the last is even very nature.' 

We have now said then what Self-Control is, what 
Imperfection of Self-Control, what Endurance, and 
what Softness, and how these states are mutually 
related. 



With respect to the Chapters here omitted, see the 
Appendix 



BOOK VIII 
CHAPTER I 

Introductory. Reasons for introducing a dissertation on 
Friendship into this Treatise 

NEXT would seem properly to follow a dissertation 
on Friendship: because, in the first place, it is either 
itself a virtue or connected with virtue; and next it 
is a thing most necessary for life. For no one would 
choose to live without friends though he should have 
all the other good things in the world: and, in fact, 
men who are rich or possessed of authority and in- 
fluence are thought to have special need of friends: 
for where is the use of such prosperity if there be 
taken away the doing of kindnesses of which friends 
are the most usual and most commendable objects ? 
Or how can it be kept or preserved without friends ? 
because the greater it is so much the more slippery 
and hazardous: in poverty moreover and all other 
adversities men think friends to be their only refuge. 

Furthermore, Friendship helps the young to keep 
from error: the old, in respect of attention and such 
deficiencies in action as their weakness makes them 
liable to ; and those who are in their prime, in respect 
of noble deeds ('They two together going' Homer 
says, you may remember) because they are thus more 
able to devise plans and carry them out. 

Again, it seems to be implanted in us by Nature: 
as, for instance, in the parent towards the offspring 
and the offspring towards the parent (not merely in 
the human species, but likewise in birds and most 
animals), and among kindred beings, generally, but 
specially among men ; for which reason we commend 
those men who love their fellows : and one may see 
in the course of travel how close of kin and how 
friendly man is to man. 



CHAP, n ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS 217 

Furthermore, Friendship seems to be the bond of 
Social Communities, and legislators seem to be more 
anxious to secure it than Justice even. I mean, 
Unanimity is somewhat like to Friendship, and this 
they certainly aim at and esp ecially drive out faction 
as being inimical. 

Again, where people are in Friendship Justice is 
not required l ; but, on the other hand, though they 
are just, they need Friendship in addition, and that 
principle which is most truly just is thought to 
partake of the nature of Friendship. 

Lastly, not only is it a thing necessary but honour- 
able likewise: since we praise those who are fond 
of friends, and the having numerous friends is thought 
a matter of credit to a man ; some go so far as to 
hold that ' good man ' and ' friend ' are terms 
synonymous. 



CHAPTER II 

A statement of rarious opinions respecting Friendship 

YET the disputed points respecting it are not 
few; some men lay down that it is a kind of 
resemblance, and that men who are like one another 
are friends: whence come the common sayings, 'Like 
will to like ', ' Birds of a feather ', and so on. Others, 
on the contrary, say, ' Two of a trade never agree '. 

Again, some men push their enquiries on these 
points higher and reason physically : as Euripides, 1 
who says : 

1 ' Owe no man anything, but to lore one another : 
for ho that loveth another It'itli fulfilled the Late.' Romans 
xiii, 8. 

1 i.e. Euripides and Heraclitus believed in the ' at 
traction of opposites '. [En.] 



218 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vra 

' The earth by drought consumed doth love the rain, 
And the great heaven, overcharged with rain, 
Doth love to fall in showerg upon the earth.' 

Heraclitus, again, maintains, that ' contrariety is ex- 
pedient, and that the best agreement arises from 
things differing, and that all things come into being 
in the way of the principle of antagonism '. 

Empedocles, among others, in direct opposition to 
these, affirms, that ' like aims at like '. 

These physical questions we will take leave to 
omit, inasmuch as they are foreign to the present 
enquiry; and we will examine such as are proper 
to man and concern moral characters and feelings: 
as, for instance, ' Does Friendship arise among all 
without distinction, or is it impossible for bad men 
to be friends ? ', and ' Is there but one species of 
Friendship, or several ? ', for they who ground the 
opinion that there is but one on the fact that 
Friendship admits of degrees hold that upon insufficient 
proof; because things which are different in species 
admit likewise of difference in degree (on this point 
we have spoken before). 



CHAPTER III 

Of the. object -matter of Friendship [or Love] 

OUR view will soon be cleared on these points when 
we have ascertained what is properly the object-matter 
of Friendship : for it is thought that not everything 
indiscriminately, but some peculiar matter alone, is 
the object of this affection; that is to say, what is 
good, or pleasurable, or useful. Now it would seem 
that that is useful through which accrues any good or 
pleasure, and so the objects of Friendship, as absolute 
Ends, are the good and the pleasurable. 

A question here arises ; whether it is good absolutely 



CHAP, ra ETHICS 219 

or that which is good to the individuals, for which 
men feel Friendship (these two being sometimes dis- 
tinct) : and similarly in respect of the pleasurable. It 
seems then that each individual feels it towards that 
which is good to himself, and that abstractedly it is 
the real good which is the object of Friendship, and to 
each individual that which is good to each. It comes 
then to this ; that each individual feels Friendship not 
for what is but for that which conveys to his mind the 
impression of being good to himself. But this will 
make no real difference, because that which is truly 
the object of Friendship will also convey this im- 
pression to the mind. 

There are then three causes from which men feel 
Friendship: but the term is not applied to the case 
of fondness for things inanimate because there is no 
requital of the affection nor desire for the good of 
those objects. It certainly savours of the ridiculous to 
say that a man fond of wine wishes well to it: the 
only sense in which it is true being that he wishes 
it to be kept safe and sound for his own use and 
benefit. 1 . But to the friend they say one should wish 
all good for his sake. And when men do thus wish 
good to another (he not reciprocating the feeling), 
people call them Kindly; because Friendship they 
describe as being ' Kindliness between persons who 
reciprocate it '. But must they not add that the 
feeling must be mutually known ? for many men 
are kindly disposed towards those whom they have 
never seen but whom they conceive to be amiable or 
useful: and this notion amounts to the same thing 
as a real feeling between them. 

Well, these are plainly Kindly-disposed towards one 

1 In this sense, therefore, is it sung of Mrs. Gilpin, that 
she 

' Two stone bottles found, 

To hold the liquor that she loved, 

And keep it safe and sound.' 



220 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vm 

another: but how can one call them friends while 
their mutual feelings are unknown to one another ? 
To complete the idea of Friendship, then, it is 
requisite that they have kindly feelings towards one 
another, and wish one another good from one of the 
aforementioned causes, and that these kindly feelings 
should be mutually known. 

CHAPTER IV 

Of the Imperfection of the Friendships based on the 
motives of Expediency and Pleasure 

As the motives to Friendship differ in kind so do 
the respective feelings and Friendships. The species 
then of Friendship are three, in number equal to the 
objects of it, since on the basis of each there may be 
' mutual affection mutually known '. 

Now they who have Friendship for one another 
desire one another's good according to the motive 
of their Friendship; accordingly they whose motive 
is utility have no Friendship for one another really, 
but only in so far as some good arises to them from 
one another. 

And they whose motive is pleasure are in like 
case. I mean, they have friendship for witty men, 
not because they are of a given character but because 
they are pleasant to themselves. So then they whose 
motive to Friendship is utility love their friends for 
what is good to themselves; they v/hose motive is 
pleasure do so for what is pleasurable to themselves ; 
that is to say, not in himself, but in so far as he is 
useful or pleasurable. These Friendships then are 
accidental, since the object is not beloved in himself 
but in that he furnishes advantage or pleasure as the 
case may be. 

Such Friendships are of course very liable to dis- 
solution if the parties do not continue alike : I mean, 
that the others cease to have any Friendship for them 



CHAP, iv ETHICS 221 

when they are no longer pleasurable or useful. Now 
it is the nature of utility not to be permanent but 
constantly varying: so, of course, when the motive 
which made them friends is vanished, the Friendship 
likewise dissolves; since it existed only relatively to 
those circumstances. 

Friendship of this kind is thought to exist princi- 
pally among the old (because men at that time of 
life pursue not what is pleasurable but what is pro- 
fitable) ; and in such, of men in their prime and of the 
young, as are given to the pursuit of profit. They 
that are such have no intimate intercourse with one 
another; for sometimes they are not even pleasurable 
to one another: nor, in fact, do they desire such 
intercourse unless their friends are profitable to them, 
because they are pleasurable only in so far as they 
have hopes of advantage. With these Friendships is 
commonly ranked that of hospitality. : 

But the Friendship of the young is thought to be 
based on the motive of pleasure : because they live at 
the beck and call of passion and generally pursue 
what is pleasurable to themselves and the object of 
the present moment ; and as their age changes, so 
likewise do their pleasures. Thus they form and 
dissolve Friendships rapidly: since the Friendship 
changes with the pleasurable object and such pleasure 
chn.nges quickly. 

The young are also much given up to Love ; this 
passion being, in great measure, a matter of impulse 
and based on pleasure : for which cause they conceive 
Friendships and quickly drop them, changing often 
in the same day: but these wish for society and 
intimate intercourse with their friends, since they 
thus attain the object of their Friendship. 



1 This refers to a hereditary bond of hospitality between 
two families, which was peculiar to Greek society. By 
its nature it was. therefore, official rather than personal. 

[ED.] 



222 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vm 



CHAPTER V 

On the perfections of the Friendship based on virtue, and 
the imperfections of the other two kinds 

THAT then is perfect Friendship which subsists 
between those who are good and whose similarity 
consists in their goodness : for these men wish one 
another's good in similar ways in so far as they are 
good (and good they are in themselves) ; and those are 
specially friends who wish good to their friends for 
their sakes, because they feel thus towards them on 
their own account and not as a mere matter of result ; 
so the Friendship between these men continues to 
subsist so long as they are good; and goodness, we 
know, has in it a principle of permanence. 

Moreover, each one is good in the abstract and also 
relatively to his friend, for all good men are not only 
in the abstract good but also useful to one another. 
Such friends are also mutually pleasurable because all 
good men are so in the abstract, and also relatively to 
one another inasmuch as to each individual those 
actions are pleasurable which correspond to his nature, 
and all such as are like them. Now when men are 
good these will be always the same, or at least 
similar. 

Friendship then under these circumstances is per- 
manent, as we should reasonably expect, since it 
combines in itself all the requisite qualifications. I 
mean, that Friendship of whatever kind is based upon 
good or pleasure (either abstractedly or relatively to 
the person entertaining the sentiment of Friendship), 
and results from a similarity of some sort; and to 
this kind belong all the aforementioned requisites in 
the parties themselves, because in this the parties are 
similar, and so on: there is the abstractedly good 
and the abstractedly pleasant, and as these are 
specially the object-matter of Friendship so the 



CHAP, v ETHICS 223 

feeling and the state of such Friendship is found most 
intense and most excellent in men thus qualified. 

Rare it is probable Friendships of this kind will be, 
because men of this kind are rare. Besides, all 
requisite qualifications being presupposed, there is 
further required time and intimacy : for, as the 
proverb says, men cannot know one another ' till they 
have eaten the requisite quantity of salt together'; 
nor can they in fac~ admit one another to intimacy, 
much less be friends, till each has appeared to the 
other and been proved to be a fit object of Friendship. 
They who speedily commence an interchange of 
friendly actions may be said to wish to be friends, but 
they are not so unless they are also proper objects of 
Friendship and mutually known to be such: that is 
to say, a desire for Friendship may arise quickly but 
not Friendship itself. 

Well, this Friendship is perfect both in respect of 
the time and in all other points ; and exactly the 
same and similar results accrue to each party from 
the other, which ought to be the case between friends, 

The Friendship based upon the pleasurable is, so 
to say, a copy of this, since the good are sources of 
pleasure to one another: and that based on utility 
likewise, the good being also useful to one another. 
Between men thus connected Friendships are most 
permanent when the same result accrues to both from 
one another, pleasure, for instance; and not merely 
so but from the same source, as in the case of two 
men of real humour ; and not as it is in that of a 
lover and the object of his affection, these not de- 
riving their pleasure from the same causes, but the 
former from seeing the latter and the latter from 
reviving :he attentions of the former: and when the 
bloorn of youth fades the Friendship sometimes ceases 
also, because then the lover derives no pleasure from 
seeing, and the object of his affection ceases to receive 
the attentions which were paid before : in many cases, 
however, people so connected continue friends, if 



224 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vm 

being of similar tempers they have come from custom 
to like one another's disposition. 

Where people do not interchange pleasure but profit 
in matters of Love, the Friendship is both less intense 
in degree and also less permanent : in fact, they who 
are friends because of advantage commonly part when 
the advantage ceases ; for, in reality, they never were 
friends of one another but of the advantage. 

So then it appears that from motives of pleasure 
or profit bad men may be friends to one another, 
or good men to bad men, or men of neutral character 
to one of any character whatever : but disinterestedly, 
for the sake of one another, plainly the good alone 
can be friends ; because bad men have no pleasure in 
each other unless in so far as some advantage arises. 

And further, the Friendship of the good is alone 
superior to calumny, it not being easy for men to 
believe a third person respecting one whom they have 
long tried and proved. There is between good men 
mutual confidence, and the feeling that one's friend 
would never have done one wrong, and all other 
such things as are expected in Friendship really 
worthy the name; but in the other kinds there is 
nothing to prevent all such suspicions. 

I call them Friendships, because since men com- 
monly give the name of friends to those who are 
connected from motives of profit (which is justified 
by political language, for alliances between states are 
thought to be contracted with a view to advantage), 
and to those who are attached to one another by the 
motive of pleasure (as children are), we perhaps should 
call such persons friends, and say there are several 
species of Friendship ; primarily and specially that of 
the good, in that they are good, and the rest only in 
the way of resemblance: I mean, people connected 
otherwise are friends in that way in which there 
arises to them somewhat good and some mutual re- 
semblance (because, we must remember, the pleasurable 
is good to those who are fond of it). 



CHAP, vi ETHICS 225 

These secondary Friendships, however, do not com- 
bine very well; that is to say, the same persons do 
not become friends by reason of advantage and by 
reason of the pleasurable, for these accidental matters 
are not often combined. And Friendship having been 
divided into these kinds, bad men will be friends by 
reason of pleasure or profit, this being their point of 
resemblance ; while the good are friends for one 
another's sake, that is, in so far as they are good. 

These last may be termed abstractedly and simply 
friends, the former accidentally and termed friends 
from their resemblance to these last. 



CHAPTER VI 
On the method of sustaining Friendship 

FUBTHER; just as in respect of the different virtues 
some men are termed good in respect of a certain 
inward state, others in respect of acts of working, so 
is it in respect of Friendship : I mean, they who live 
together take pleasure in, and impart good to, one 
another, but they who are asleep or are locally 
separated do not perform acts, but only are in such 
a state as to act in a friendly way if they acted at all. 
Distance in itself has no direct effect upon Friendship, 
but only prevents the acting it out : yet, if the 
absence be protracted, it is thought to cause a forget- 
fulness even of the Friend-hip; and hence it has been 
said, ' many and many a Friendship doth want of 
intercourse destroy '. 

Neither the old nor the morcse appear to be calcu- 
lated for Friendship, because the pleasurableness in 
them is small, and no one can spend his days in 
company with that which is positively painful or even 
not pleasurable ; since to avoid the painful and aim 
at the pleasurable is one of the most obvious tendencies 
of humaa nature. They who get on with one another 



226 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vm 

very fairly, but arc not in habits of intimacy, arc 
rather like people having kindly feelings towards one 
another than friends ; for nothing is so characteristic 
of friends as the living with one another, because the 
necessitous desire assistance, and the happy companion- 
ship, they being the last persons in the world for 
solitary existence. But people cannot spend their time 
together unless they are mutually pleasurable and take 
pleasure in the same objects, a quality which is 
thought to appertain to companionship. 



CHAPTER VII 

Repetition of some remarks. Supplementary remarks on 
the same subject 

THE connection then subsisting between the good 
is Friendship par excellence, as has already been 
frequently said : since that which is abstractedly good 
or pleasant is thought to be an object of Friendship 
and choice-worthy, and to each individual whatever 
is such to him, and the good man to the good man 
for both these reasons. 

(Now the entertaining the sentiment is like a feeling, 
but Friendship itself like a habit: because the former 
may have for its object even things inanimate, but 
requital of Friendship is attended with purpose which 
proceeds from a trained habit : and again, men wish 
good to the objects of their Friendship for their 
sakes, not in the way of a mere feeling but of a 
habit.) 

And the good, in loving their friend, love their own 
good (inasmuch as the good man, when brought into 
that relation, becomes a good to him with whom he 
is so connected), so that either party loves his own 
good, and repays his friend equally both in wishing 
well and in the pleasurable : for equality is said to be 



CHAP, vn ETHICS 227 

a tie of Friendship. Well, these points belong most 
to the Friendship between good men. 

But between morose or elderly men Friendship is 
less apt to arise, because they are somewhat awkward- 
tempered, and take less pleasure in intercourse and 
society (which are thought to be specially friendly and 
productive of Friendship) : and so young men become 
friends quickly, old men not so (because people do not 
become friends with any, unless they take pleasure in 
them) ; and in like manner neither do the morose. 
Yet men of these classes entertain kindly feelings 
towards one another : they wish good to one another 
and render mutual assistance in respect of their needs, 
but they are not quite friends, because they neither 
spend their time together nor take pleasure in one 
another, which circumstances are thought specially to 
belong to Friendship. 

To be a friend to many people, in the way of the 
perfect Friendship, is not possible; just as you cannot 
be in love with many at once. It is, so to speak, a 
state of excess which naturally has but one object; 
and besides, it is not an easy thing for one man to be 
very much pleased with many people at the same 
time, nor perhaps to find many really good. Again, 
a man needs experience, and to be in habits of close 
intimacy, which is very difficult. 

But it is possible to please many on the score of 
advantage and pleasure : because there are many men 
of the kind, and the services may be rendered in a 
very short time. 

Of the two imperfect kinds that which most re- 
sembles the perfect is the Friendship based upon 
pleasure, in which the same results accrue from both 
and they take pleasure in one another or in the same 
objects ; such as are the Friendships of the young, 
because a generous spirit is most found in these. 
The Friendship because of advantage is merely a 
business relation. 

Then again, the very happy have no need of persons 



228 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vm 

who arc profitable, but of pleasant ones they have 
because they wish to have people to live intimately 
with ; and what is painful they bear for a short time 
indeed, but continuously no one could support it, nay, 
not even the Chief Good itself, if it were painful to 
him individually: and so they look out for pleasant 
friends. But they ought to require such to be good also ; 
and good moreover to themselves individually, because 
then they will have all the proper requisites of Friendship. 

Men in power are often seen to make use of several 
distinct friends : for some are useful to them and 
others pleasurable, but the two are not often united : 
because they do not, in fact, seek such as shall com- 
bine pleasantness and goodness, nor such as shall be 
useful for honourable purposes : but with a view to 
attain what is pleasant they look out for witty men ; 
and again, for men who are clever at executing any 
business put into their hands : and these qualifications 
are not commonly found united in the same man. 

It has been already stated that the good man unites 
the qualities of pleasantness and usefulness : but then 
such an one will not be a friend to a superior [i.e. in 
rank etc.] unless he [i.e. the superior in rank] bo also 
his superior in goodness : for if this be not the case, 
he cannot, being surpassed in one point, make things 
equal by a proportionate degree of Friendship. 1 And 

1 The Great man will have a right to look for more 
Friendship than he bestows : but the Good man can feel 
Friendship only for, and in proportion to, the goodness of 
the other. 

[It has been argued, e.g. by Peters, that the passage 
means that the Great man must confess himself inferior 
in virtue if the Good man is to make him his friend. Either 
sense can be obtained from the words, and both present 
difficulties. The reading in the text is difficult, because 
the Good man by hypothesis could not be surpassed in 
goodness. The alternative suggests that the Good man 
could be the friend of a prince who was not a good man. 
The rendering in the text is preferable. ED.] 



CTIAP. vin ETHICS 229 

characters who unite superiority of station and good- 
ness arc not common. 



CHAPTER VIII 

Of Friendship between parties who are unequal 

Now all the kinds of Friendships which have been 
already mentioned exist in a state of equality, inas- 
much as either the same results accrue to both and 
they wish the same things to one another, or else 
they barter one thing against another pleasure, for 
instance, against profit. It has been said already that 
Friendships of this latter kind are less intense in 
degree and less permanent. 

And their resemblance or dissimilarity to the same 
thing makes them to be thought to be and not to 
be Friendships : they show like Friendships in right 
of their likeness to that which is based on virtue (the 
one kind having the pleasurable, the other the profit- 
able, both of which belong also to the other) ; and 
again, they do not show like Friendships by reason of 
their unlikeness to that true kind, which unlikeness 
consists herein, that, while that is above calumny and 
so permanent, these quickly change and differ in many 
other points. 

But there is another form of Friendship, that, 
namely, in which the one party is superior to the 
other; as between father and son, elder and younger, 
husband and wife, ruler and ruled. These also differ 
one from another: the Friendship between parents 
and children is not the same as between the ruler and 
the ruled, nor has the father the same towards the 
son as the son towards the father, nor the husband 
towards the wife as she towards him ; because the 
function, and therefore the excellence, of each of these 
is different, and different therefore are the causes of 



230 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vm 

their feeling Friendship; distinct and different there- 
fore are their feelings and states of Friendship. 

And the same results do not accrue to each from 
the other, nor in fact ought they to be looked for; 
but, when children render to their parents what they 
ought to the authors of their being, and parents to 
their sons what they ought to their offspring, the 
Friendship between such parties will be permanent 
and equitable. 

Further ; the feeling of Friendship should be in a 
due proportion in all Friendships which are between 
superior and inferior; I mean, the better man, or 
the more profitable, and so forth, should be the object 
of a stronger feeling than he himself entertains, 
because when the feeling of Friendship comes to be 
after a certain rate then equality in a certain sense 
is produced, which is thought to be a requisite in 
Friendship. 

(It must be remembered, however, that the equal 
is not in the same case as regards Justice and Friend- 
ship : for in strict Justice the exactly proportioned 
equal ranks first, and the actual numerically equal 
ranks second, while in Friendship this is exactly 
reversed.) 

And that equality is thus requisite is plainly shown 
by the occurrence of a great difference of goodness or 
badness, or prosperity, or something else : for in this 
case, people are not any longer friends, nay, they do 
not even feel that they ought to be. The clearest 
illustration is perhaps the case of the gods, because 
they are most superior in all good things. It is 
obvious too, in the case of kings, for they who are 
greatly their inferiors do not feel entitled to be friends 
to them ; nor do people very insignificant to be friends 
to those of very high excellence or wisdom. Of 
course, in such cases, it is out of the question to 
attempt to define the limits within which they may 
be friends : for you may remove many points of 
agreement and the Friendship last nevertheless; but 



CTTAP. vm ETHICS 31 

when one of the parties is very far separated (as a 
god from men), it cannot be. 

This has given room for a doubt, whether friends 
do really wish to their friends the very highest goods, 
as that they may be gods : because, in case the wish 
were accomplished, they would no longer have them 
for friends, nor in fact would they have the good 
things they had, because friends are good things. 
If then it has been rightly said that a friend wishes 
to his friend good things for that friend's sake, it 
must be understood that the friend is to remain such 
as he now is : that is to say, he will wish the greatest 
good to him of which as man he is capable ; yet 
perhaps not all, because each man desires good for 
himself most of alL 

It is thought that desire for honour makes the mass 
of men wish rather to be the objects of the feeling 
of Friendship than to entertain it themselves and 
for this reason they are fond of flatterers, a flatterer 
being a friend inferior (or at least pretending to be 
such) and rather to entertain towards another the 
feeling of Friendship than to be himself the object 
of it, since the former is thought to be nearly the 
same as being honoured, which the mass of men 
desire. And yet men seem to choose honour, not for 
its own sake, but incidentally : I mean, the common 
run of men delight to be honoured by those in power 
because of the hope it raises ; that is, they think they 
shall get from them anything they may happen to 
be in want of, so they delight in honour as an earnest 
of future benefit. They acrain who grasp at honour 
at the hands of the good and those who are really 
acquainted with their merits desire to confirm their 
own opinion about themselves : so they take pleasure 
in the conviction that they are good, which is based 
on the judgment of those who assert it. But in being 
the objects of Friendship men delight for its own sake, 
and so this may be judged to be higher than being 
honoured and Friendship to be in itself choice-worthy. 



232 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vm 

Friendship, moreover, is thought to consist in feeling, 
rather than being the object of, the sentiment of 
Friendship, which is proved by the delight mothers 
have in the feeling: some there are who give 
their children to be adopted and brought up by 
others, and knowing them bear this feeling towards 
them never seeking to have it returned, if both are 
not possible; but seeming to be content with seeing 
them well off and bearing thu feeling themselves to- 
wards them, even though they, by reason of ignorance, 
never render to them any filial regard or love. 

Since then Friendship stands rather in the enter- 
taining, than in being the object of, the sentiment, 
and they are praised who are fond of their friends, 
it seems that entertaining the sentiment is the Excel- 
lence of friends; and so,, in whomsoever this exists 
hi duo proportion these are stable friends and their 
Friendship is permanent. And in this way may they 
who are unequal best be friends, because they may 
thus be made equal. 

Equality, then, and similarity are a tie to Friend- 
ship, and specially the similarity of goodness, because 
good men, being stable in themselves, are also stable 
as regards others, and neither ask degrading services 
nor render them, but, so to say, rather prevent them : 
for it is the part of the good neither to do wrong 
themselves nor to allow their friends in so doing. 

The bad, on the contrary, have no principle of 
stability : in fact, they do not even continue like 
themselves : only they come to be friends for a short 
time from taking delight in one another's wickedness. 
Those connected by motives of profit, or pleasure, 
hold together somewhat longer so long, that is to 
say, as they can give pleasure or profit mutually. 

The Friendship based on motives of profit is thought 
to be most of all formed out of contrary elements : 
the poor man, for instance, is thus a friend of the 
rich, and the ignorant of the man of information ; that 
is to say, a man desiring that of which he is, as it 



CHAP, ix ETHTCS 233 

happens, in want, gives something else in exchange 
for it. To this same class we may refer the lover and 
beloved, the beautiful and the ill-favoured. For this 
reason lovers sometimes show in a ridiculous light by 
claiming to be the objects of as intense a feeling as 
they themselves entertain : of course if they are 
equally fit objects of Friendship they are perhaps 
entitled to claim this, but if they have nothing of the 
kind it is ridiculous. 

Perhaps, moreover, the contrary does not aim at 
its contrary for its own sake but accidentally : the 
mean is really what is grasped at ; it being good for 
the dry, for instance, not to become wet but to attain 
the mean, and so of the hot, etc. 

However let us drop these questions, because they 
are in fact somewhat foreign to our purpose. 



CHAPTER IX 

The Relation between Justice and Friendship 

IT seems too, as was stated at the commencement, 
that Friendship and Justice have the same object- 
matter, and subsist between the same persons I 
mean that in every Communion there is thought to 
be some principle of Justice and also some Friend- 
ship. Men address as friends, for instance, those who 
are their comrades by sea, or in war, and in like man- 
ner also those who are brought into communion with 
them in other ways : and the Friendship, because also 
the Justice, is coextensive with the Communion. This 
justifies the common proverb ' the goods of friends 
are common ', since Friendship rests upon Com- 
munion. 

Now brothers and intimate companions have all in 
common, but other people have their property sepa- 
rate, and some have more in common and others less, 
because the Friendships likewise differ in degree. So 



234 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK viu 

too do the various principles of Justice involved, not 
being the same between parents and children as be- 
tween brothers, nor between companions as between 
fellow-citizens merely, and so on of all the other 
conceivable Friendships. Different also are the prin- 
ciples of Injustice as regards these different grades, 
and the acts become intensified by being done to 
friends ; for instance, it is worse to rob your com- 
panion than one who is merely a fellow-citizen ; to 
refuse help to a brother than to a stranger ; and to 
strike your father than any one else. So then the 
Justice naturally increases with the degree of Friend- 
ship, as being between the same parties and growing 
at the same rate. 

All cases of Communion are parts, so to say, of 
the great Social one, since in them men associate 
with a view to some advantage and to procure some 
of those things which are needful for life ; and tho 
great Social Communion is thought originally to 
have been associated and to continue for the sake 
of some advantage : this being the point at which 
legislators aim, affirming that to be just which is 
generally expedient. 

All the other cases of Communion aim at advan- 
tage in particular points ; the crew of a vessel at 
that which is to result from the voyage which is under- 
taken with a view to making money, or some such 
object ; comrades in war at that which is to result 
from the war, grasping cither at wealth or victory, or 
the capture [or perhaps, ' founding ' ] of a city ; and 
those of the same tribe, or dome, in like manner. 

Some of them are thought to be formed for pleasure's 
sake, those, for instance, of bacchanals or club-fellows, 
which are with a view to a sacred rite or merely com- 
pany. But all these seem to be ranged under the 
great Social one, inasmuch as the aim of this is, not 
merely the expediency of the moment, but for life and 
at all times ; with a view to which the members of it 
institute sacrifices and their attendant assemblies, 



CHAP, x ETHICS 23.5 

to render honour to the gods and procure for them- 
selves respite from toil combined with pleasure. For 
it appears that sacrifices and religious assemblies 
in old times were made as a kind of first-fruits after 
the ingathering of the crops, because at such seasons 
they had most leisure. 

So then it appears that all the instances of Com- 
munion are parts of the great Social one : and corre- 
sponding Friendships will follow upon such Com- 
munions. 



CHAPTER X 

Of the various forms of Political Constitutions, and tltir 
types in Domestic life 

OF Political Constitutions there are three kinds ; 
and equal in number are the deflections from them, 
being, so to say, corruptions of them. 

The former are Kingship, Aristocracy, and that 
which recognises the principle of wealth, which it 
seems appropriate to call Timocracy (though men 
commonly call it Constitutional Government). Of 
these the best is Monarchy, and Timocracy the worst. 

From Monarchy the deflection is Despotism ; both 
being Monarchies but widely differing from each 
other ; for the Despot looks to his own advantage, 
but the King to that of his subjects : for he is in 
fact no King who is not thoroughly independent 
and superior to the rest in all good things, and he 
that is this has no further wants : he will not then 
have to look to his own advantage but to that of his 
subjects, for he that is not in such a position is the 
sort of king that is elected by lot for the nonce. 

But Despotism is on a contrary footing to this 
Kingship, because the Despot pursues his own good : 
and in the case of this its inferiority is most evident 
and what is worse is contrary to what is best. The 



236 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vm 

transition to Despotism is made from Kingship, Des- 
potism being a corrupt form of Monarchy; that is to 
say, the bad King comes to be a Despot. 

From Aristocracy to Oligarchy the transition is 
made by the fault of the rulers in distributing the 
public property contrary to right proportion ; i.e. 
giving either all that is good, or the greatest share, 
to themselves, and the offices to the same persons 
always, making wealth their idol ; thus a few bear 
rule and they bad men in the place of the best. 

From Timocracy the transition is to Democracy, 
they being contiguous : for it is the nature of Timo- 
cracy to be in the hands of a multitude, and all in the 
same grade of property are equal. Democracy is 
the least vicious of all, since herein the form of the 
constitution undergoes least change. 

We'll, these are generally the changes to which the 
various Constitutions are liable, being the least in 
degree and the easiest to make. 

Likenesses, and, as it were, models of them, one 
may find even in Domestic life : for instance, the 
Communion between a Father and his Sons presents 
the figure of Kingship, because the children are the 
Father's care ; and hence Homer names Jupiter 
Father because Kingship is intended to be a paternal 
rule. Among the Persians, however, the Father's 
rule is Despotic, for they treat their Sons as slaves. 
The relation of Master to Slaves is of the nature of 
Despotism because the point regarded herein is the 
Master's interest : this now strikes me to be as it 
ought, but the Persian custom to be mistaken, because 
for different persons there should be different rules. 

Between Husband and Wife the relation takes the 
form of Aristocracy, because he rules by right and 
in such points only as the Husband should, and gives 
to the Wife all that befits her to have. Where the 
Husband lords it in everything he changes the relation 
into an Oligarchy, because he does it contrary to 
right and not as being the better of the two. In some 



CHAP, xi ETHICS 237 

instances the Wives take the reins of government, 
being heiresses : here the rule is carried on not in right 
of goodness but by reason of wealth and power, as it is 
in Oligarchies. 

Timocracy finds its type in the relation of Brothers, 
they being equal except as to such differences as age 
introduces : for which reason, if they are very different 
in age, the Friendship conies to be no longer a frater- 
nal one. But Democracy is represented specially by 
families which have no head (all being there equal), 
or in which the proper head is weak and so every 
member does that which is right in his own eyes. 



CHAPTER XI 

The Correlativeness of Friendship and Justice 

ATTENDANT then on each form of Political Con- 
stitution there plainly is Friendship exactly coex- 
tensive with the principle of Justice ; that between 
a King and his Subjects being in the relation of a 
superiority of benefit, inasmuch as he benefits his 
subjects, it being assumed that he is a good king 
and takes care of their welfare as a shepherd tends 
his flock ; whence Homer (to quote him again) calls 
Agamemnon, ' shepherd of the people '. And of this 
same kind is the Paternal Friendship, only that it 
exceeds the former in the greatness of the benefits 
done, because the Father is the author of being 
(which is esteemed the greatest benefit), and of main- 
tenance and education (these things are also, by the 
way, ascribed to ancestors generally) : and by the 
law of nature the father has the right of rule over 
his sons, ancestors over their descendants, and the 
king over his subjects. 

These friendships are also between superiors and 
inferiors, for which reason parents are not merely loved 



238 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vm 

but also honoured. The principle of Justice also be- 
tween these parties is not exactly the same but according 
to proportion, because so also is the Friendship. 

Now between Husband and Wife there is the same 
Friendship as in Aristocracy, for the relation is deter- 
mined by relative excellence, and the better person 
has the greater good, and each has what befits : so 
also is the principle of Justice between them. 

The Fraternal Friendship is like that of Companions, 
because brothers are equal and much of an age, and 
such persons have generally like feelings and like 
dispositions. Like to this also is the Friendship of 
a Timocracy, because the citizens are intended to be 
equal and equitable : rule, therefore, passes from 
hand to hand, and is distributed on equal terms : so too 
is the Friendship accordingly. 

In the perversions of the constitutional forms, 
just as the principle of Justice is but small so is the 
Friendship also, and least of all in the most perverted 
form ; in Despotism there is little or no Friendship. 
For generally wherever the ruler and the ruled have 
nothing in common there is no Friendship because there 
is no Justice ; but the case is as between an artisan 
and his tool, or between soul and body, and master 
and slave ; all these are benefited by those who use 
them, but towards things inanimate there is neither 
Friendship nor Justice : nor even towards a horse or 
an ox, or a slave qua slave, because there is nothing 
in common : a slave as such is an animate tool, a tool 
an inanimate slave. Qua slave, then, there is no Friend- 
ship towards him, only qua man : for it is thought 
that there is some principle of Justice between every 
man, and every other who can share in law and be a 
party to an agreement ; and so there can be somewhat 
of Friendship, in so far as he is man. So in Despotism 
the Friendships and the principle of Justice are in- 
considerable in extent, but in Democracies they are 
most considerable because the citizens, being equal, 
have much in common. 



CHAP, xn ETHICS 239 

CHAPTER XII 

Of Uie Friendships whose basis is Hood-relationship 

Now of course all Friendship is based upon Com- 
munion, as has been already stated : but one would 
be inclined to separate off from the rest the Friend- 
ship of Kindred, and that of Companions. I mean, 
those of men of the same city, or tribe, or crew, and 
all such, are more peculiarly, it would seem, based 
upon Communion, inasmuch as they plainly exist in 
right of some agreement expressed or implied : among 
these one may rank also the Friendship of Hospitality. 

The Friendship of Kindred is likewise of many 
kinds, and appears in all its varieties to depend on 
the Parental : parents, I mean, love their children as 
being a part of themselves, children love their parents 
as being themselves derived from them. But parents 
know their offspring more than these know that they 
are from the parents, and the source is more closely 
bound to that which is produced than that which is 
produced is to that which formed it : of course, what- 
ever is derived from one's self is proper to [i.e. the 
property of] that from which it is so derived (as, for 
instance, a tooth or a hair, or any other thing what- 
ever to him that has it) : but the source to it is in no 
degree proper, or in an inferior degree at least. 

Then again the greater length of time comes in : 
the parents love their offspring from the first moment 
of their being, but their offspring them only after a 
lapse of time when they have attained intelligence or 
sense. These considerations serve also to show why 
mothers have greater strength of affection than fathers. 

Now parents love their children as themselves 
(since what is derived from themselves becomes a 
kind of other self by the fact of separation), but child- 
ren their parents as being sprung from them. And 
brothers love one another from being sprung from 



240 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vm 

the same that is, their sameness with the common 
stock creates a sameness with one another ; whence 
comes the phrases, ' same blood ', ' root ', and so on. 
In fact they are the same, in a sense, even in the 
separate distinct individuals. 

Then again the being brought up together, and the 
nearness of age, are a great help towards Friendship, 
for a man likes one of his own age and persons who 
are used to one another are companions, which ac- 
counts for the resemblance between the Friendship 
of Brothers and that of Companions. 

And cousins and all other relatives derive their 
bond of union from these, that is to say, from their 
community of origin : and the strength of this bond 
varies according to their respective distances from the 
common ancestor. 

Further, the Friendship felt by children towards 
parents, and by men towards the gods, is as towards 
something good and above them ; because these have 
conferred the greatest possible benefits, in that they 
are the causes of their being and being nourished, 
and of their having been educated after they were 
brought into being. 

And Friendship of this kind has also the plea- 
surable and the profitable more than that between 
persons unconnected by blood, in proportion as their 
life also is more shared in common. Then again in 
the Fraternal Friendship there is all that there is in 
that of Companions, and more in the good, and gener- 
ally in those who are alike in proportion as they are 
more closely tied and from their very birth have a 
feeling of affection for one another to begin with, and 
as they are more like in disposition who spring from 
the same stock and have grown up together and been 
educated alike : and besides this they have the great- 
est opportunities in respect of time for proving one 
another, and can therefore depend most securely upon 
the trial. The elements of Friendship between other 
consanguinities will be of course proportionably similar. 



. xil ETHICS 241 

Between Husband and Wife there is thought to 
be Friendship by a law of nature ; for man is by 
nature disposed to pair, more than to associate in 
Communities, in proportion as the family is prior in 
order of time and more absolutely necessary than the 
Community. And procreation is a function more 
common to him with other animals all the other 
animals have Communion thus far ; but human 
creatures cohabit not merely for the sake of procreation 
but also with a view to life in general, 1 because in this 
connexion functions are immediately divided, and 
some belong to the man others to the woman. Thus 
they help one the other, putting what is peculiar to 
each into the common stock. 

And for these reasons this Friendship is thought 
to combine the profitable and the pleasurable ; it 
will be based upon virtue also if they are good people, 
because each has its specific goodness, and they may 
take delight in this quality in each other. Children 
too are thought to be a tie : accordingly the childless 
sooner separate, for the children are a good common 
to both and anything in common is a bond of 
union. 

The question how a man is to live with his wife, 
or (more generally) one friend with another, appears 
to be no other than this, how it is just that they should ; 
because plainly there is not the same principle of 
Justice between a friend and friend, as between stran- 
gers, or companions, or those who merely attend the 
same lectures. 

l 'For the mutual society, help, and comfort that the 
one ought to have of the other, both in prosperity and 
adversity '. 



242 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vm 



CHAPTER XIII 

Of disputes arising in the Friendship because of advan- 
taije, with a solution of the questions raised 

THERE are then, as was stated at the commence- 
ment of this book, three kinds of Friendship, and in 
each there may be friends on a footing of equality 
and friends in the relation of superior and inferior ; 
we find, I mean, that people who are alike in goodness, 
become friends, and better with worse ; so also pleasant 
people. Again, because of advantage people are friends, 
either balancing exactly their mutual profitableness 
or differing from one another herein. Well then, those 
who are equal should in right of this equality be equal- 
ized also by the degree of their Friendship and the other 
points, and those who are on a footing of inequality 
by rendering Friendship in proportion to the superiority 
of the other party. 

Fault-finding and blame arise, either solely or most 
naturally, in Friendship of which utility is the motive. 
For they who are friends by reason of goodness, are 
eager to do kindnesses to one another because this 
is a natural result of goodness and Friendship ; and 
when men are vying with each other for this End there 
can be no fault-finding nor contention : since no one 
is annoyed at one who entertains for him the senti- 
ment of Friendship and does kindnesses to him, but 
if of a refined mind he requites him with kind actions. 
And suppose that one of the two exceeds the other, 
yet, as he is attaining his object, he will not find fault 
with his friend, for good is the object of each party. 

Neither can there well be quarrels between men 
who are friends for pleasure's sake, because supposing 
them to delight in living together then both attain 
their desire ; or if not, a man would be put in a ridi- 
culous light who should find fault with another for 
not pleasing him, since it is in his power to forbear 



CHAP, xm ETHICS 243 

intercourse with him. But the Friendship because of 
advantage is very liable to fault-finding ; because, as 
the parties use one another with a view to advantage, the 
requirements are continually enlarging, and they think 
they have less than of right belongs to them, and find 
fault because though justly entitled they do not get 
as much as they want ; while they who do the kindnesses 
can never come up to the requirements of those to 
whom they are being done. 

It seems also, that as the Just is of two kinds, the 
unwritten and the legal, so Friendship because of 
advantage is of two kinds, what may be called the 
Moral and the Legal : and the most fruitful source 
of complaints is that parties contract obligations and 
discharge them not in the same line of Friendship. 
The Legal is upon specified conditions, either purely 
tradesmaniike from hand to hand [i.e., as we say, ' in 
hard cash '] or somewhat less rigorous as regards time 
but still by agreement a quid pro quo. 

In this Legal kind the obligation is clear and admits 
of no dispute, the friendly element is the delay in re- 
quiring its discharge ; and for this reason in some 
countries no actions can be maintained at Law for 
the recovery of such debts, it being held that they 
who have dealt on the footing of credit must be con- 
tent to abide the issue. 

That which may be termed the Moral kind is not 
upon specified conditions, but a man gives as to his 
friend and so on. Still he expects to receive an equiva- 
lent, or even more, as though he had not given but 
lent. He also will find fault, because he does not get 
the obligation discharged in the same way as it was 
contracted. 

Now this results from the fact, that all men, or 
the generality at least, wish what is honourable, but, 
when tested, choose what is profitable ; and the doing 
kindnesses disinterestedly is honourable while receiving 
benefits is profitable. In such cases one should, if 
able, make a return proportionate to the good received, 



244 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK vin 

and do so willingly, because one ought not to make 
a disinterested friend l of a man against his inclination : 
one should act, I say, as having made a mistake origin- 
ally in receiving kindness from one from whom one 
ought not to have received it, he being not a friend nor 
doing the act disinterestedly. One should therefore 
discharge one's self of the obligation as having re- 
ceived a kindness on specified terms : and if able a 
man would engage to repay the kindness, while if he 
were unable even the doer of it would not expect it 
of him : so that if he is able he ought to repay it. But 
one ought at the first to ascertain from whom one is 
receiving kindness, and on what understanding, that on 
that same understanding one may accept it or not. 

A question admitting of dispute is whether one 
is to measure a kindness by the good done to the 
receiver of it, and make this the standard by which 
to requite, or by the kind intention of the doer ? 

For they who have received kindnesses frequently 
plead in depreciation that they have received from 
their benefactors such things as were small for them 
to give, or such as they themselves could have got 
from others : while the doers of the kindnesses affirm 
that they gave the best they had, and what could not 
have been got from others, and under danger, or in 
such-like straits. 

May we not say, that if utility is the motive of 
the Friendship the ad\ T antage conferred on the re- 
ceiver must be the standard ? because he it is who 
requests the kindness and the other serves him in his 
need on the understanding that he is to get an equiva- 
lent. The assistance rendered is then exactly pro- 
portionate to the advantage which the receiver has 
obtained, and he should therefore repay as much as he 
gained by it, or even more, this being more creditable. 

J Which one would be assuming he was, if one declined 
to recognize the obligation to requite the favour or kind- 
ness. 



CHAP. XTV ETHICS 245 

In Friendships based on goodness, the question, 
of course, is never raised, but herein the motive of 
the doer seems to be the proper standard, since virtue 
and moral character depend principally on motive. 

CHAPTER XIV 

Of the disputes arising in Friendships between unequal 
parties 

QUARRELS arise also in those Friendships in which 
the parties are unequal because each party claims 
the greater share, and of course, when this happens, 
the Friendship is broken up. 

The man who is better than the other thinks that 
having the greater share pertains to him of right, for 
that more is always awarded to the good man ; and 
similarly the man who is more profitable to another 
than that other to him. ' One who is useless', they 
say, ' ought not to share equally, for it comes to a 
tax, and not a Friendship, unless the fruits of the 
Friendship are reaped in proportion to the works 
done ' : their notion being, that, as in a money partner- 
ship they who contribute more receive more, so should 
it be in Friendship likewise. 

On the other hand, the needy man and the less 
virtuous advance the opposite claim : they urge that 
' it is the very business of a good fri nd to help those 
who are in need, else what is the use of having a good 
or powerful friend if one is not to reap the advantage 
at all ? ' 

Now each seems to advance a right claim and to 
be entitled to get more out of the connexion than the 
other, only not more of the same thing; the superior 
man should receive more respect, the needy man more 
profit. Respect is the reward of goodness and bene- 
ficence, profit being the aid of need. 

This is plainly the principle acted upon in Political 
Communities : he receives no honour who gives no 



246 ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS BOOK vm 

good to the common stock, for the property of the 
Public is given to him who does good to the Public, 
and honour is the property of the Public. It is not 
possible both to make money out of the Public and 
receive honour likewise, because no one will put up 
with the less in every respect. So to him who suffers 
loss as regards money [i.e., in the public service] they 
award honour, but money to him who can be paid by 
gifts : since, as has been stated before, the observing 
due proportion equalizes and preserves Friendship. 

Like rules then should be observed in the inter- 
course of friends who are unequal ; and to him who 
advantages another in respect of money, or goodness, 
that other should repay honour, making requital 
according to his power ; because Friendship requires 
what is possible, not what is strictly due, this being 
not possible in all cases, as in the honours paid to 
the gods and to parents : no man could ever make 
the due return in these eases, and so he is thought to be 
a good man who pays respect according to his ability. 

For this reason it may be judged never to be allow- 
able for a son to disown his father, whereas a father 
may his son : because he that owes is bound to pay, 
and a son can never, by anything he has done, fully 
requite the benefits first conferred on him by his 
father, and so is always a debtor. But they to whom 
anything is owed may cast off their debtors : there- 
fore the father may his son. But at the same time it 
must perhaps be admitted, that it seems no father ever 
would sever himself utterly from a son, except in a case 
of exceeding depravity : because independently of the 
natural Friendship, it is like human nature not to put 
away from one's self the assistance which a son might 
render. But to the son, if depraved, assisting his 
father is a thing to be avoided, or at least one which 
he will not be very anxious to do ; most men being 
willing enough to receive kindness, but averse to 
doing it as unprofitable. 

Let thus much suffice on these points. 



BOOK IX 
CHAPTER I 

Cases of complaint in Friemlships between parties 
dissimilar. Who has the right of fixing the rale of 
the return to be made ? 

WELL, in all the Friendships the parties to which 
are dissimilar 1 it is the proportionate which equalizes 
and preserves the Friendship, as has been already 
stated : I mean, in the Social Friendship, the cobbler, 
for instance, gets an equivalent for his shoes after a 
certain rate ; and the weaver, and all others in like 
manner. Now in this case a common measure has 
been provided in money and to this accordingly all 
things are referred and by this are measured ; but in 
the Friendship of Love the complaint is sometimes 
from the lover that, though he loves exceedingly, his 
love is not requited, he having perhaps all the time 
nothing that can be the object of Friendship: again, 
oftentimes from the object of love that he who as a 
suitor promised any and every thing now performs 
nothing. These cases occur because the Friendship of 
the lover for the beloved object is based upon plea- 
sure, that of the other for him upon utility, and in 
one of the parties the requisite quality is not found; 
for, as these are respectively the grounds of the 
Friendship, the Friendship comes to be broken up 
because the motives to it cease to exist. The parties 
loved not one another but qualities in one another 
which are not permanent ; and so neither are the 
Friendships. Whereas the Friendship based upon the 
moral character of the parties, being independent 
and disinterested, is permanent, as we have already 
stated. 



1 i.e. where t'^ motives of the friends are different. 
[En.] 



248 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK ix 

Quarrels arise also when the parties realize different 
results and not those which they desire ; for the not 
attaining one's special object is all one, in this rase, 
with getting nothing at all, as in the well-known 
case where a man made promises to a musician, 
that he should receive in proportion to the excellence 
of his music ; but when, towards morning, the 
musician claimed the performance of his promises, 
he replied that he had given him pleasure l for 
pleasure. Of course, if each party had intended this, 
it would have been all right ; but if the one desires 
amusement and the other gain, and the one gets his 
object and the other not, the dealing cannot be fair: 
because a man fixes his mind upon what he happens 
to want, and will give so and so for that specific 
thing. 

The question then arises, who is to fix the rate ? 
the man who first gives, or the man who first takes ? 
because, prima facie, the man who first gives seems 
to leave the rate to be fixed by the other party. 
This, they say, was in fact the practice of Protagoras : 
when he taught a man anything he would bid the 
learner estimate the worth of the knowledge gained 
by his own private opinion; and then he used to take 
so much from him. In such cases, however, some 
people adopt the rule : 

'With specified reward a friend should bo content.' 

They are certainly fairly found fault with who take 
the money in advance and then do nothing of what 
they said they would do, their promises having been 
so far beyond their ability; for such men do not per- 
form what they agreed. (The Sophists, however, are 
perhaps obliged to take this course [i.e. of taking pay- 
ment in advance], because no ono would give a 
sixpence for their knowledge.) These then, I say, 

1 i.e. the musician had enjoyed the pleasure of anticipa- 
tion. [ED.] 



CHAP, i ETHICS 249 

are fairly found fault with, because they do not 
what they have already taken money for doing. 

In cases where no stipulation as to the respective 
services is made, they who disinterestedly do the first 
service will not raise the question (as we have said 
before), because it is the nature of Friendship, based 
on mutual goodness, to be free from such quarrels : 
the requital is to be made with reference to the in- 
tention of the other, the intention being characteristic 
of the true friend and of goodness. 

And it would seem the same rule should be laid 
down for those who are connected with one another 
as teachers and learners of philosophy; for here 
the value of the commodity cannot be measured 
by money, and, in fact, an exactly equivalent price 
cannot be set upon it, but perhaps it is sufficient 
to do what one can, as in the case of the gods or 
one's parents. 

But where the original giving is not upon these 
terms, but avowedly for some return, the most proper 
course is perhaps for the requital to be such as both 
shall allow to be proportionate ; and, where this can- 
not be, then for the receiver to fix the value would 
seern to bo not only necessary but also fair. Because 
when the first giver gets that which is equivalent to 
the advantage received by the other, or to what he 
would have given to secure the pleasure he has 
had, then he has the value from him ; for not only 
is this seen to be the course adopted in matters of 
buying and selling but also in some places the law 
docs not allow of actions upon voluntary dealings. 
This is on the principle that when one man has trusted 
another he must be content to have the obligation 
discharged in the same spirit as he originally con- 
tracted it; that is to say, it is thought fairer for the 
trusted, than for the trusting, party, to fix the value. 
For, in general, those who have and those who wish 
to get things do not set the same value on them : 
yvhat is their own, and what they give in each case, 



25 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK rx 

appears to them worth a great deal: but yet the 
return should be made according to the estimate of 
those who have received first. But perhaps the 
receiver should estimate what he has received, not 
by the value he sets upon it now that he has it, but 
by that which he set upon it before he obtained it. 



CHAPTER II 

Cases of comparative obligations put, and partially solved 

QUESTIONS also arise upon such points as the fol- 
lowing : Whether one's father has an unlimited claim 
on one's services and obedience, or whether the sick 
man is to obey his physician ? or, in an election of a 
general, the warlike qualities of the candidates should 
alone be regarded ? 

In like manner whether one should do a service 
rather to one's friend or to a good man ? whether 
one should rather requite a benefactor or give to 
one's companion, supposing that both are not within 
one's power. 

Is not the true answer that it is no easy task to 
determine all such questions accurately, inasmuch as 
they involve numerous differences of all kinds, in 
respect of amount and what is Honourable and what 
is necessary ? It is obvious, of course, that no one 
person can unite in himself all claims. Again, the 
requital of benefits is, in general, a higher duty than 
doing unsolicited kindnesses to one's companion ; in 
other words, the discharging of a debt is more obli- 
gatory upon one than the duty of giving to a com- 
panion. And yet this rule may admit of exceptions ; 
for instance, which is the higher duty? for one who 
has been ransomed out of the hands of robbers to 
ranso:n in return his ransomer, be he who lie may, 
or to iT-pay him on his demand though he has not 
been taken by robbers, or to rauioui his own father? 



CHAP, n ETHICS 251 

for it would seem that a man ought to ransom his 
father even in preference to himself. 

Well then, as has been said already, as a general 
rule the debt should be discharged, but if in a par- 
ticular case the giving greatly preponderates as 
being either honourable or necessary, we must be 
swayed by these considerations: I mean, in some 
cases the requital of the obligation previously ex- 
isting may not be fair. Suppose, for instance, that 
the original benefactor has conferred a kindness on 
a good man, knowing him to be such, whereas this 
said good man has to repay it believing him to be 
a scoundrel. 

And again, in certain cases no obligation lies on 
a man to lend to one who has lent to him ; suppose, 
for instance, that a bad man. lent to him, as being 
a good man, under the notion that he should get 
repaid, whereas the said good man has no hope of 
repayment from him being a bad man. Either then 
the case is really as we have supposed it and then 
the claim is not fair ; or if it is not so but they think 
it is, still in so acting people are not to be thought 
to act wrongly. In short, as has been oftentimes 
stated before, all statements regarding feelings and 
actions can be definite only in proportion as their 
object matter is so. It is of course quite obvious 
that not all people have the same claim upon one, 
nor are the claims of one's father unlimited, just 
as Jupiter does not claim ail kinds of sacrifice without 
distinction. And since the claims of parents, brothers, 
companions, and benefactors, are all different, we 
must give to each what belongs to and befits each. 

And this is seen to be the course commonly 
pursued ; to marriages men commonly invite their 
relatives, because these are from a common stock 
and therefore all the actions in any way pertaining 
thereto are common also : and to funerals men think 
that relatives ought to assemble in preference to other 
people, for the same reason. 



252 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK ix 

And it would seem that in respect of maintenance 
it is our duty to assist our parents in preference to all 
others, as being their debtors, and because it is more 
honourable to succour in these respects the authors 
of our existence than ourselves. Honour likewise we 
ought to pay to our parents just as to the gods, but 
then, not all kinds of honour: not the same, for 
instance, to a father as to a mother : nor again to a 
father the honour due to a wise man or to a general 
but that which is a father's due, and in like manner 
to a mother that which is a mother's. 

To all our elders also the honour befitting their 
age, by rising up in their presence, turning out of 
the way for them, and all similar marks of respect : 
to our companions again, or brothers, frankness and 
free participation in all we have. And to those of 
the same family, or tribe, or city, with ourselves, and 
all similarly connected with us, we should constantly 
try to render their due, and to discriminate what 
belongs to each in respect of nearness of connexion, 
or goodness, or usefulness. Of course in the case of 
those of the same class the discrimination is easier: 
in that of those who are in different classes it is a 
matter of more trouble. This, however, should not 
be a reason for giving up the attempt, but we must 
observe the distinctions so far as it is practicable 
to do so. 



CHAPTER III 

What circumstances cause the breaking up of Friendships, 
allowably or otherwise. Cases put 

A QUESTION is also raised as to the propriety of 
dissolving or not dissolving those Friendships the 
parties to which do not remain what they were when 
the connexion was formed. 

Now, surely in respect of those whose motive to 



CHAP, m ETHICS 253 

Friendship is utility or pleasure there can be nothing 
wrong in breaking up the connexion when they 
no longer have those qualities : because they were 
friends [not of one another but] of those qualities : 
and, these having failed, it is only reasonable to 
expect that they should cease to entertain the 
sentiment. 

But a man has reason to find fault if the other 
party, being really attached to him because of ad- 
vantage or pleasure, pretended to be so because of 
his moral character : in fact, as we said at the com- 
mencement, the most common source of quarrels 
between friends is their not being friends on the same 
grounds as they suppose themselves to be. 

Now when a man has been deceived in having 
supposed himself to excite the sentiment of Friend- 
ship by reason of his moral character, the other 
party doing nothing to indicate this, he has but 
himself to blame ; but when he has been deceived by 
the pretence of the other, he has a right to find fault 
with the man who has so deceived him, ay, even 
more than with utterers of false coin, in proportion 
to the greater preciousncss of that which is the 
object- matter of the villainy. 

But suppose a man takes up another as being a 
good man, who turns out, and is found by him, to 
be a scoundrel, is he bound still to entertain Friend- 
ship for him ? or may we not say at once it is im- 
possible? since it is not everything which is the 
object-matter of Friendship, but only that which is 
good. So there is no obligation to be a bad man's 
friend, nor, in fact, ought one to be such: for one 
ought not to be a lover of evil, nor to be assimilated 
to what is base; which would be implied, because 
we have said before, like is friendly to like. 

Are we then to break with him instantly ? Not 
perhaps in all cases ; only where our friends are in- 
curably depraved ; when there is a chance of amend- 
ment we are bound to aid in repairing the moral 



254 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK tx 

character of our friends even more than their substance, 
in proportion as it is better and more closely related 
to Friendship. Still he who should break off the 
connexion is not to be judged to act wrongly, for he 
never was a friend to such a character as the other 
now is, and therefore, since the man is changed and 
he cannot reduce him to his original state, he backs 
out of the connexion. 

To put another case: suppose that one party 
remains what he was when the Friendship was 
formed, while the other becomes morally improved 
and widely different from his friend in goodness. 
Is the improved character to treat the other as a 
friend ? 

May we not say it is impossible ? The case of 
course is clearest where there is a great difference, 
as in the Friendships of boys : for suppose that of 
two boyish friends the one still continues a boy in 
mind and the other becomes a man of the highest 
character, how can they be friends, since they neither 
are pleased with the same objects, nor like and dis- 
like the same things ? For these points will not 
belong to them as regards one another, and without 
them it was assumed they cannot be friends because 
they cannot live in intimacy : and of the case of those 
who cannot do so we have spoken before. 

Well then, is the improved party to bear himself 
towards his former friend in no way differently to 
what he would have done had the connexion never 
existed ? 

Surely he ought to bear in mind the intimacy of 
past times, and, just as we think ourselves bound to 
do favours for our friends in preference to strangers, 
so to those who have been friends and are so no 
longer we should allow somewhat on the score of 
previous Friendship, whenever the cause of severance 
is not excessive depravity on their part. 



CHAP, iv ETHICS 255 



CHAPTER IV 

The feelings of true Friendship are transferred from Self 
to others. The different feelings of the good and bad 
men respectively towards Self, described 

Now the friendly feelings which are exhibited 
towards our friends, and by which Friendships are 
characterized, seem to have sprung out of those which 
we entertain towards ourselves. 

I mean, people define a friend to be ' one who 
intends and does what is good (or what ho believes 
to be good) to another for that other's sake ' ; or 
'one who wishes his friend to be and to live for 
that friend's own sake' (which is the feeling of 
mothers towards their children, and of friends who 
have come into collision). Others again, ' one who 
lives with another and chooses the same objects,' or 
'one who sympathizes with his friend in his sorrows 
and in his joys' (this too is especially the case with 
mothers). 

Well, by some one of these marks people generally 
characterize Friendship : and each of these the good 
man has towards himself, and all others have them in 
so far as they suppose themselves to be good. And, 
as has been said before, goodness, that is the good 
man, seems to be a measure to every one else. 

For he is at unity in himself, and with every part 
of his soul he desires the same objects ; and he wishes 
for himself both what is, and what he believes to be, 
good ; and he docs it (it being characteristic of the 
good man to work at what is good) ; and for the sake 
of himself, inasmuch as he does it for the sake of his 
Intellectual Principle which is generally thought to 
be a man's self. Again, he wishes himself, and speci- 
ally this Principle whereby he is an intelligent being, 
to live and be preserved in life, because existence is 
a good to him that is a good man. 



256 ARISTOTLE'S HOOK IX 

But it is to himself that each individual wishes 
what is good, and no man, conceiving the possibility 
of his becoming other than he now is, chooses that 
that New Self should have all things indiscriminately : 
e.g. God, as it is, has the Chief Good ; but he has 
it in right of being whatever he actually now is l : 
and the Intelligent Principle must be judged to be 
each man's Self, or at least eminently so [though 
other Principles help, of course, to constitute him the 
man he is]. 

Furthermore, the good man wishes to continue to 
live with himself ; for he can do it with pleasure, in 
that his memories of past actions are full of delight 
and his anticipations of the future are good and 
such are pleasurable. Then, again, he has good store 
of matter for his Intellect to contemplate, and he 
most specially sympathizes with his Self in its griefs 
and joys, because the objects which give him pain and 
pleasure are at all times the same, not one tiling to- 
day and a different one to-morrow : because he is not 
given to changing his mind, if one may so speak. It 
is then because each of these feelings is entertained 
by the good man towards his own Self and a friend 
feels towards a friend as towards himself (a friend 
being in fact another Self), that Friendship is thought 
to be some one of these things and they are accounted 
friends in whom they are found. Whether or no there 
can really be Friendship between a man and his Self is 
a question we will not at present entertain : there 
may be thought to be Friendship, in so far as there are 
two or more selves, as we have said, and because the 
highest degree of Friendship, in the usual acceptation 
of that term, resembles the feeling entertained by a 
man towards himself. 

But it may be urged that the aforesaid requisites 

1 Better, ' but only on condition of his retaining his 
identity ' ; i.e. each man desires perfect happiness for 
lunisdj. [ED.] 



CHAP, iv ETHICS 257 

are to all appearance found in the common run of men, 
though they are men of a low stamp. 

May it not be answered, that they share in them 
only in so far as they please themselves, and conceive 
themselves to be good ? for certainly, they are not 
either really, or even apparently, found in any one 
of those who are very depraved and villainous we 
may almost say not even in those who are bad men 
at all : for they are at variance with themselves and 
lust after different things from those which in cool 
reason they wish for, just as men who fail of Self- 
Control : I mean, they choose things which, though 
hurtful, are pleasurable, in preference to those which 
in their own minds they believe to be good. Others 
again, from cowardice and indolence, decline to do 
what still they are convinced is best for them : while 
they who from their depravity have actually done 
many dreadful actions hate and avoid life, and accord- 
ingly kill themselves. And the wicked seek others 
in whose company to spend their time, but fly from 
themselves because they have many unpleasant sub- 
jects of memory, and can only look forward to others 
like them when in solitude but drown their remorse 
in the company of others. And as they have nothing 
to raise the sentiment of Friendship so they never 
feel it towards themselves. 

Neither, in fact, can they who are of this character 
sympathize with their Selves in their joys and sorrows, 
because their soul is, as it were, rent by faction, and 
the one principle, by reason of the depravity in them, 
is grieved at abstaining from certain things, while 
the other and better principle is pleased thereat ; and 
the one drags them this way and the other that way 
as though actually tearing them asunder. 2 And 

2 ' I have sometimes considered in what troublesome 
case is that Chamberlain in an Inn who being but one is 
to give attendance to many guests. For suppose them 
all in one chamber ; yet, if one shall command him to 



258 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK ix 

though it is impossible actually to have at the same 
time the sensations of pain and pleasure ; yet after 
a little time the man is sorry for having been pleased, 
and he could wish that those objects had not given 
him pleasure ; for the wicked are full of remorse. 

It is plain then that the wicked man cannot be in 
the position of a friend even towards himself, because 
he has in himself nothing which can excite the senti- 
ment of Friendship. If then to be thus is exceedingly 
wretched, it is a man's duty to flee from wickedness 
with all his might and to strive to be good, because 
thus may he be friends with himself and may come to 
be a friend to another. 



CHAPTER V 
Of Kindly Feeling 

KINDLY Feeling, though resembling Friendship, 
is not identical with it, because it may exist in refer- 
ence to those whom we do not know and without the 
object of it being aware of its existence, which Friend- 
ship cannot. (This, by the way, has also been said 
before.) And further, it is not even Affection because 
it docs not imply intensity nor yearning which are 
both consequences of Affection. Again, Affection 

come to the window, and the other to the table, and 
another to the bed, and another to the chimney, and 
another to come upstairs, and another to go downstairs, 
and all in the same instant, how would he be distracted 
to please them all ? And yet such is the sad condition 
of my soul by nature ; not only a servant but a slave 
unto sin. Pride calls me to the window, gluttony to the 
table, wantonness to the bed, laziness to the chimney, 
ambition commands me to go upstairs, and covetousness > 
to come down. Vices, 1 see, are as well contrary to them- 
selves as to Virtue '. (Fuller's Good Thoughts in Bad 
Times : Mix't Contemplations, viii). 



CHAP, v ETHICS 259 

requires intimacy but Kindly Feeling may arise quite 
suddenly, as sometimes is felt towards athletes in a 
competition. I mean we come to be kindly disposed 
to them and sympathize in their wishes, but still we 
would not join them in any action, because, as we said, 
we conceive this feeling of kindness suddenly and so 
have but a superficial liking, 

But it does seem to be the starting point of a 
Friendship, just as pleasure, received through the 
sight, is the commencement of Love : for no one 
falls in love without being first pleased with the per- 
sonal appearance of the beloved object ; and yet he 
who takes pleasure in it does not therefore necessarily 
love, but when he wearies for the object in its absence 
and desires its presence. Exactly in the same way 
men cannot be friends without having passed through 
the stage of Kindly Feeling, and yet they who are in 
that stage do not necessarily advance to Friendship : 
they merely have an inert wish for the good of those 
toward whom they entertain the feeling, but would 
not join them in any action, nor put themselves out 
of the way for them. So that in a metaphorical way 
of speaking, one might say that it is Friendship in the 
blossom, 1 and when it has endured for a space and 
grown into intimacy it comes to be real Friendship ; 
but not that whose object is advantage or pleasure, 
because such motives cannot produce even Kindly 
Feeling. 

I mean, he who has received a kindness requites 
it by Kindly Feeling towards his benefactor, and is 
right in so doing : but he who wishes another to be pros- 
perous, because he has hope of advantage through 
his instrumentality, does not seem to be kindly dis- 
posed to that person but rather to himself ; just as 
neither is he his friend if he pays court to him for 
any interested purpose. 

1 The metaphor is analogous to that of the blossom 
compared with the ' fruit in due season '. [ED." 



260 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK ix 

Kindly Feeling always arises by reason of good- 
ness and a certain amiability, when one man gives 
another the notion of being a fine fellow, or brave 
man, etc, as we said was the case sometimes when 
we watch athletes. 



CHAPTER VI 
Of Unity of Sentiment 

UNITY of Sentiment is also plainly connected with 
Friendship, and therefore it is not the same as Unity 
of Opinion because this might exist even between 
people unacquainted with one another. 

Nor do men usually say people are united in senti- 
ment merely because they agree in opinion on any 
point, as, for instance, on points of astronomical 
science (Unity of Sentiment herein not having any 
connexion with Friendship), but they say that Com- 
munities have Unity of Sentiment when they agree 
respecting points of expediency and take the same 
line and carry out what has been determined in com- 
mon consultation. 

Thus we see that Unity of Sentiment has for its 
object matters of action, and such of these as are 
of importance, and of mutual, or, in the case of single 
States, common interest : when, for instance, all 
agree that office be elective, or that alliance be made 
with the Lacedaemonians, or that Pittacus 1 be ruler 
(that is to say, supposing he himself was willing). 
But when each wishes himself to be in power (as the 
brothers Eteocles and Polyneices in the Ph&nissce of 
Euripides), they quarrel and form parties : for, plainly, 
Unity of Sentiment does not merely imply that each 

1 Pittacus was elected tyrant of Mitylene, and resigned 
against the will of the people. Therefore there was 
unanimity only so long as he consented to rule. [Eo.] 



CHAP. VTI ETHICS 261 

entertains the same idea be it what it may, but that 
they do so in respect of the same object, as when both 
the populace and the sensible men of a State desire 
that the best men should be in office, because then all 
attain their object. 

Thus Unity of Sentiment is plainly a social Friend- 
ship, as indeed it is said to be : since it has for its object- 
matter things expedient and relatins to life. 

And this Unity exists among the good : for they 
have it towards themselves and towards one another, 
being, if I may be allowed the expression, in the same 
position : I mean the wishes of such men are steady 
and do not ebb and flow like the Euripus, and they 
wish what is just and expedient and aim at these 
things in common. 

The bad, on the contrary, can as little have Unity 
of Sentiment as they can be real friends, except to a 
very slight extent, desiring as they do unfair advan- 
tage in things profitable while they shirk labour and 
service for the common good : and while each man 
wishes for these things for himself he is jealous of 
and hinders his neighbour : and as they do not 
watch over the common good it is lost. The result 
is that they quarrel while they are for keeping one 
another to work but are not willing to perform their 
just share. 



CHAPTER VH 

The difference of feeling in Benefactors, and in the 
objects of their kindnesses, stated and explained 

BEXEFACTOP^S are commonly held to have more 
Friendship for the object of their kindness than these 
for them : and the fact is made a subject of discussion 
and enquiry, as being contrary to reasonable ex- 
pectation. 

The account of the matter which satisfies most 



262 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK ix 

persons is that the one are debtors and the other 
creditors : and therefore that, as in the case of actual 
loans the debtors wish their creditors out of the way 
while the creditors are anxious for the preservation 
of their debtors, so those who have done kindnesses 
desire the continued existence of the people they 
have done them to, under the notion of getting a 
return of their good offices, while these are not parti- 
cularly anxious about requital. 

Epicharmus, I suspect, would very probably say 
that they who give this solution judge from their 
own baseness l ; yet it certainly is like human nature, 
for the generality of men have short memories on 
these points, and aim rather at receiving than con- 
ferring benefits. 

But the real cause, it would seem, rests upon nature, 
and the case is not parallel to that of creditors ; be- 
cause in this there is no affection to the persons, but 
merely a wish for their preservation with a view to the 
return : whereas, in point of fact, they who have done 
kindnesses feel friendship and love for those to whom 
they have done them, even though they neither are, 
nor can by possibility hereafter be, in a position to 
serve their benefactors. 

And this is the case also with craftsmen ; every 
one, I mean, feels more affection for his own work than 
that work possibly could for him if it were animate. 
It is perhaps specially the case with poets ; for these 
entertain very great affection for their poems, loving 
them as their own children. It is to this kind of 
thing I should be inclined to compare the case of 
benefactors : for the object of their kindness is their 
own work, and so they love this more than this loves 
its creator. 

And the account of this is that existence is to all a 



1 Better ' who look at the seamy side of things ' (Burnet) ; 
or ' whoso seat is in a bad part (of the theatre) ' i.e. who 
do not see clearly. [Eix] 



CHAP, vri ETHICS 263 

thing choice-worthy and an object of affection. Now 
we exist by acts of working, that is, by living and 
acting : he that has created a given work is, in a sense, 
identical with the thing created, for his work is in it : 
therefore he loves his work because he loves existence. 
And this is natural, for the work produced displays 
in act what existed before potentially. 

Then again, the benefactor has a sense of honour in 
right of his action, so that he may well take pleasure 
in him in whom this resides ; but to him who has 
received the benefit there is nothing honourable in 
respect of his benefactor, only something advantageous 
which is both less pleasant and less the object of Friend- 
ship. 

Again, pleasure is derived from the actual working 
out of a present action, from the anticipation of a 
future one, and from the recollection of a past one: 
but the highest pleasure and special object of affection 
is that which attends on the actual working. Now 
the benefactor's work abides (for the honourable is 
enduring), but the advantage of him who has received 
the kindness passes away. 

Again, there is pleasure in recollecting nonourable 
actions, but in recollecting advantageous ones there 
is none at all or much less (though the contrary is true 
of the expectation of advantage). 

Further, the entertaining the feeling of Friendship 
is like acting on another ; but being the object of the 
feeling is like being acted upon. 

So then, entertaining the sentiment of Friendship, 
and all feelings connected with it, attend on those 
who, in the given case of a benefaction, are the superior 
party. 

Once more : all people value most what has cost 
them much labour in the production ; for instance, 
people who have themselves made their money are 
fonder of it than those who have inherited it : and 
receiving kindness is, it seems, unlaborious, but doing 
it is laborious. And this is the reason why the female 



264 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK ix 

parents are most fond of their offspring ; for their 
part in producing them is attended with most labour, 
and they know more certainly that they are theirs. 
This feeling would seem also to belong to benefactors. 



CHAPTER VIII 
Of Sdf-Love 

A QUESTION is also raised as to whether it is right 
to love one's Self best, or some one else ; because 
men find fault with those who love themselves best, 
and call them in a disparaging way lovers of Self ; 
and the bad man is thought to do everything he does 
for his own sake merely, and the more so the more 
depraved he is ; accordingly men reproach him with 
never doing anything unselfish. But the good man 
acts from a sense of honour (and the more so the better 
man he is), and for his friend's sake, and is careless of 
his own interest. 

But with these theories facts are at variance, and 
not unnaturally : for it is commonly said also that a 
man is to love most him who is most his friend, and 
he is most a friend who wishes good to him to whom 
he wishes it for that man's sake even though no one 
knows. Now these conditions, and in fact all the rest 
by which a friend is characterized, belong specially 
to each individual in respect of his Self : for we have 
said before that all the friendly feelings are derived 
to others from those which have Self primarily for 
their object. And all the current proverbs support 
this view ; for instance, ' one soul ', ' the goods of 
friends are common ', ' equality is a tie of Friendship ', 
' the knee is nearer than the shin '. For all these 
things exist specially with reference to a man's own 
Self : he is specially a friend to himself and so he is 
bound to love himself the most. 

It is with good reason questioned which of the two 



CHAP, vni ETHICS 265 

parties one should follow, both having plausibility on 
their side. Perhaps then, in respect of theories of this 
kind, the proper course is to distinguish and define 
how far each is true, and in what way. If we could 
ascertain the sense in which each uses the term ' Self- 
loving ', this point might be cleared up. 

Well now, they who use it disparagingly give the 
name to those who, in respect of wealth, and ^honours 
and pleasures of the body, give to themselves the 
larger share : because the mass of mankind grasp 
after these and are earnest about them as being the 
best things ; which is the reason why they are matters 
of contention. They who are covetous in regard to 
these gratify their lusts and passions in general, that 
is to say the irrational part of their souL Now the 
mass of mankind are so disposed, for which reason 
the appellation has taken its rise from that mass which 
is low and bad. Of course they are justly reproached 
who are Self-loving in this sense. 

And that the generality of men are accustomed to 
apply the term to denominate those who do give 
such things to themselves is quite plain : suppose, 
for instance, that a man were anxious to do, more 
than other men, acts of justice, or self-mastery, or 
any other virtuous acts, and, in general, were to 
secure to himself that which is in the abstract good 
and honourable, no man would call him Self-loving, 
nor blame him. 

Yet might such an one be judged to be more truly 
Self-loving : certainly he gives to himself the things 
which are most noble and most good, and gratifies that 
Principle of his nature which is most rightfully authori- 
tative, and obeys it in everything : and just as that 
which possesses the highest authority is thought to 
constitute a Community or any other system, so also 
in the case of man : and so he is most truly Self -loving 
who loves and gratifies this Principle. 

Again, men are ?aid to have, or to fail of having, 
self-control, according as the Reason controls or not, 



266 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK ix 

it being plainly implied thereby that this Principle 
constitutes each individual ; and people are thought 
to have done of themselves, and voluntarily, those 
things specially which are done with Reason. 

It is plain, therefore, that this Principle does, either 
entirely or specially, constitute the individual man, 
and that the good man specially loves this. For this 
reason then he must be specially Self -loving, in a kind 
other than that which is reproached, and as far superior 
to it as living in accordance with Reason is to living 
at the beck and call of passion, and aiming at the truly 
noble to aiming at apparent advantage. 

Now all approve and commend those who are emin- 
ently earnest about honourable actions, and if all 
would vie with one another in respect of the noble, 
and be intent upon doing what is most truly noble and 
honourable, society at large would have all that is 
proper while each individual in particular would have 
the greatest of goods, Virtue being assumed to be such. 

And so the good man ought to be Self-loving, be- 
cause by doing what is noble he will have advantage 
himself and will do good to others. But the bad man 
ought not to be, because he will harm himself and his 
neighbours by following low and evil passions. In 
the case of the bad man, what he ought to do and what 
he does are at variance, but the good man does what 
he ought to do, because all Reason chooses what is 
best for itself and the good man puts himself under 
the direction of Reason. 

Of the good man it is true likewise that he does 
many things for the sake of his friends and his country, 
even to the extent of dying for them, if need be ; for 
money and honours, and, in short, all the good things 
which others fight for, he will throw away while eager 
to secure to himself that which is noble ; he will prefer 
a brief and great joy to a tame and enduring one, 
and to live nobly for one year rather than ordinarily 
for many, and one great and noble action to 
many trifling ones. And this is perhaps that which 



CHAP, ix ETHICS 267 

befalls men who die for their country and friends ; 
they choose great glory for themselves : and they will 
lavish their own money that their friends may receive 
more, for hereby the friend gets the money but the 
man himself that which is noble. So, in fact, he gives 
to himself the greater good. It is the same with 
honours and offices ; all these things he will give up 
to his friend, because this is honourable and praise- 
worthy : and so with good reason is he esteemed a 
fine character since he chooses the honourable before 
all things else. It is possible also to give up the oppor- 
tunities of action to a friend ; and to have caused a 
friend's doing a thing may be more noble than having 
done it one's self. 

In short, in all praiseworthy things the good man 
does plainly give to himself a larger share of the 
honourable. In this sense it is right to be Self-loving ; 
in the vulgar acceptation of the term it is not. 



CHAPTER IX 
Whether the Happy man will need Friends? 

A QUESTION is raised also respecting the Happy 
man, whether he will want Friends, or no. 

Some say that they who are blessed and independ- 
ent have no need of Friends, for they already have 
all that is good, and so, as being independent, want 
nothing further : whereas the notion of a friend's 
office is to be as it were a second Self and procure for 
a man what he cannot get by himself. Hence the 
saying : 

' When Fortune gives us good, what need we Friends ? ' 

On the other hand, it looks, absurd, while we are 
assigning to the Happy man all other good things, 
not to give him Friends, which are, after all, thought 
to be the greatest of external goods. 



268 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK ix 

Again, if it is more characteristic of a friend to confer 
than to receive kindnesses, and if to be beneficent 
belongs to the good man and to the character of virtue, 
and if it is more noble to confer kindnesses on friends 
than strangers, the good man will need objects for his 
benefactions. And out of this last consideration 
springs a question whether the need of Friends be 
greater in prosperity or adversity, since the unfor- 
tunate man wants people to do him kindnesses and 
they who are fortunate want objects for their kind acts. 

Again, it is perhaps absurd to make our Happy 
man a solitary, because no man would choose the 
possession of all goods in the world on the condition 
of solitariness, man being a social animal and formed 
by nature for living with others. Of course the Happy 
man has this qualification since he has all those things 
which are good by nature, and it is obvious that the 
society of friends and good men must be preferable 
to that of strangers and ordinary people, and we con- 
clude, therefore, that the Happy man does need 
Friends. 

But then, what do they mean whom we quoted 
first, and how are they right ? Is it not that the 
mass of mankind mean by Friends those who are 
useful ? And of course the Happy man will not 
need such because he has all good things already ; 
neither will he need such as are Friends with a view 
to the pleasurable, or at least only to a slight extent ; 
because his life, being already pleasurable, does not 
want pleasure imported from without ; and so, since 
the Happy man does not need Friends of these kinds, 
he is thought not to need any at all. 

But, it may be, this is not true : for it was stated 
originally, that Happiness is the exercise of faculty. 
Now this plainly is something that must come into 
being, not be already there like a mere piece of property. 

If then the being happy consists in living and exer- 
cise of faculty, and the good man's is in itself excellent 
and pleasurable (as we said at the commencement of the 



CHAP, rx ETHICS 269 

treatise), and if what is our own reckons among things 
pleasurable, and if we can view our neighbours better 
than ourselves and their actions better than we can 
our own, then the actions of their Friends who are good 
men are pleasurable to the good, inasmuch as they 
have both the requisites which are naturally pleasant. 
So the man in the highest state of happiness will need 
Friends of this kind, since he desires to contemplate 
good actions, and actions of his own, which those of his 
friend, being a good man, are. 

Again, common opinion requires that the Happy 
man live with pleasure to himself. Now life is burthen- 
some to a man in solitude, for it is not easy to work 
continuously by one's self, but in company with, and 
in regard to others, it is easier, and therefore the 
working, being pleasurable in itself, will be more con- 
tinuous (a thing which should be in respect of the 
Happy man) ; for the good man, in that he is good, 
takes pleasure in the actions which accord with Virtue 
and is annoyed at those which spring from Vice, just 
as a musical man is pleased with beautiful music and 
annoyed by bad. And besides, as Theognis says, 
Virtue itself may be improved by practice, from living 
with the good. 

And, upon the following considerations, more purely 
metaphysical, it will probably appear that the good 
friend is naturally desirable to the good man. We 
have said before, that whatever is naturally good 
is also in itself good and pleasant to the good man. 
Now the fact of living, so far as animals are concerned, 
is characterized generally by the power of feeling, 
in man it is characterized by that of feeling, or of 
rationality (the faculty of course being referred to the 
actual operation of the faculty, certainly the main 
point is the actual operation of it) ; so that living 
seems mainly to consist in the act of feeling or exert- 
ing rationality. Xow the fact of living is in itself one 
of the things that are good and pleasant (for it is a 
definite totality, and whatever is such belongs to the 



270 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK ix 

nature of good), but what is naturally good is good 
to the good man : for which reason it seems to be 
pleasant to all. (Of course one must not suppose 
a life which is depraved and corrupted, nor one spent 
in pain, for that which is such is indefinite as are its 
inherent qualities : however, what is to be said of pain 
will be clearer in what is to follow.) 

Now the fact of living is in itself good and pleasant 
(and this appears from the fact that all desire it, and 
specially those who are good and in high happiness, 
their course of life being most choice-worthy and their 
existence most choice-worthy likewise). Moreover he 
that sees perceives that he sees : he that hears per- 
ceives that he hears ; and ho that walks perceives that 
he walks ; and in all the other instances in like manner 
there is a faculty which reflects upon and perceives 
the fact that we are exercising faculty, so that we can 
perceive that we perceive and intellectually know that 
we intellectually know : but to perceive that we perceive 
or that we intellectually know, is to perceive that we 
exist, since existence was defined to be perceiving or 
intellectually knowing. Now to perceive that one fives 
is a pleasant thing in itself, life being a thing naturally 
good, and the perceiving of the presence in ourselves 
of things naturally good being pleasant. 

Therefore the fact of living is choice-worthy, and 
to the good specially so since existence is good and 
pleasant to them ; for they receive pleasure from the 
internal consciousness of that which in itself is good. 

But the good man is to his friend as to himself, 
friend being but a name for a second Self ; therefore 
as his own existence is choice-worthy to each, so too, 
or similarly at least, is his friend's existence. But 
the ground of one's own existence being choice-worthy 
is the perceiving of one's self being good, any such 
perception being in itself pleasant. Therefore one 
ought to be thoroughly conscious of one's friend's 
existence, which will result from living with him, that 
is, sharing in his words and thoughts : for this is the 



CHAP, x ETHICS 271 

meaning of the term as applied to the human species, 
not mere feeding together as in the case of brutes. 

If then to the man in a high state of happiness 
existence is in itself choice-worthy, being naturally 
good and pleasant, and so too a friend's existence, 
then the friend also must be among things choice- 
worthy. But whatever is choice-worthy to a man he 
should have or else he will be in this point deficient. 
The man therefore who is come up to our notion 
' Happy ' will need good Friends. 



CHAPTER X 

Of the number of Friends which it is possible and desirable 
to have 

ARE we then to make our friends as numerous 
as possible ? or, as in respect of acquaintance it ia 
thought to have been well said ' have not thou many 
guest-friends 1 yet be not without ', so too in respect 
of Friendship may we adopt the precept, and say that 
a man should not be without friends, nor again have 
exceeding many friends ? 

Now as for friends who are intended for use, the 
maxim I have quoted will, it seems, fit in exceedingly 
well, because to requite the services of many is a 
matter of labour, and a whole life would not be long 
enough to do this for them. So that, if more numer- 
ous than what will suffice for one's own life, they 
become superfluous, and are hindrances in respect 
of living well : and so we do not want them. And 
again, of those who are to be for pleasure a few are 
quite enough, just like sweetening in our food. 

But of the good are we to make as many as we ever 
can, or is there any measure of the number of friends, 
as there is of the number to constitute a Political 

1 See note, p. 221. 



272 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK TX 

Community ? I mean, you cannot make one out of 
ten men, and if you increase the number to one hun- 
dred thousand it is not any longer a Community. 2 
However, the number is not perhaps some one definite 
number but any between certain extreme limits. 

Well, of friends likewise there is a limited number, 
which perhaps may be laid down to be the greatest 
number with whom it would be possible to keep up 
intimacy, this being thought to be one of the greatest 
marks of Friendship, and it being quite obvious that 
it is not possible to be intimate with many, in other 
words, to part one's self among many. And besides 
it must be remembered that they also are to be friends 
to one another if they are all to live together : but 
it is a matter of difficulty for many men at once. 

It comes likewise to be difficult to bring home to 
one's self the joys and sorrows of many : because in 
all probability one would have to sympathize at the 
same time with the joys of this one and the sorrows 
of that other. 

Perhaps then it is well not to endeavour to have 
very many friends but so many as are enough for 
intimacy : because, in fact, it would seem not to be 
possible to be very much a friend to many at the 
same time. And, for the same reason, not to be in 
love with many at the same time : love being a kind 
of excessive Friendship which implies but one object : 
and all strong emotions must be limited in the number 
towards whom they are felt. 

And if we look to facts this seems to be so : for 

not many at a time become friends in the way of 

companionships. All the famous Friendships of the 

: kind are between two persons : whereas they who 

, have many friends, and meet everybody on the footing 

2 The ancient Greeks had no idea of a Nation State. 
Their ideal was the City-State, in which all citizens could 
take part in the deliberations of the sovereign assembly. 
[Eo.] 



CHAP, xi ETHICS 273 

of intimacy, seem to be friends really to no one 
except in the way of general society ; I mean the 
characters denominated as over-coniplaisant. 

To be sure, in the way merely of society, a man 
may be a friend to many without being necessarily 
over-complaisant but being truly good : but one 
cannot be a friend to many because of their virtue, 
and for the persons' own sake ; in fact, it is a matter 
for contentment to find even a few such. 



CHAPTER XI 
In what circumstances of fortune Friends are most needed 

AGAIN : are friends most needed in prosperity or 
in adversity ? they are required, we know, in both 
states, because the unfortunate need help and the 
prosperous want people to live with and to do kind- 
nesses to : for they have a desire to act kindly to 
some one. 

To have friends is more necessary in adversity, 
and therefore in this case useful ones are wanted ; 
and to have them in prosperity is more honourable, 
and this is why the prosperous want good men for 
friends, it being preferable to confer benefits on, and 
to live with, these. For the very presence of friends 
is pleasant even in adversity, since men when grieved 
are comforted by the sympathy of their friends. 

And from this, by the way, the question might 
be raised, whether it is that they do in a manner take 
part of the weight of calamities, or only that their 
presence, being pleasurable, and the consciousness 
of their sympathy, make the pain of the sufferer less. 

However, we will not further discuss whether these 
which have been suggested or some other causes pro- 
duce the relief; the effect we speak of is a matter of 
plain fact. 

But their presence has probably a mixed effect : 

S 



274 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK ix 

I mean, not only is the very seeing friends pleasant, 
especially to one in misfortune, and actual help to- 
wards lessening the grief is afforded (the natural 
tendency of a friend, if he is gifted with tact, being 
to comfort by look and word, because he is well ac- 
quainted with the sufferer's temper and disposition 
and therefore knows what things give him pleasure 
and pain), but also the perceiving a friend to be grieved 
at his misfortunes causes the sufferer pain, because 
every one avoids being cause of pain to his friends. 
And for this reason they who are of a manly nature 
are cautious not to implicate their friends in their 
pain ; and unless a man is exceedingly callous to the 
pain of others he cannot bear the pain which is thus 
caused to his friends : in short, he does not admit men 
to wail with him, not being given to wail at all. Women, 
it is true, and men who resemble women, like to have 
others to groan with them, and love such as friends 
and sympathizers, but it is plain that it is our duty 
in all things to imitate the highest character. 

On the other hand, the advantages of friends in 
our prosperity are the pleasurable intercourse and 
the consciousness that they are pleased at our good 
fortune. 

It would seem, therefore, that we ought to call in 
friends readily on occasion of good fortune, because 
it is noble to be ready to do good to others : but on 
occasion of bad fortune, we should do so with reluct- 
ance ; for we should as little as possible make others 
share in our ills ; on which principle goes the saying, 
' I am unfortunate, let that suffice '. The most proper 
occasion for calling them in is when with small trouble 
or annoyance to themselves they can be of very great 
use to the person who needs them. 

But, on the contrary, it is fitting perhaps to go to 
one's friends in their misfortunes unasked and with 
alacrity (because kindness is the friend's office and 
specially towards those who are in need and who do 
not demand it as a right, this being more creditable 



CHAP, xii ETHICS 275 

and more pleasant to both) ; and on occasion of their 
good fortune to go readily, if we can forward it in 
any way (because men need their friends for this like- 
wise), but to be backward in sharing it, any great 
eagerness to receive advantage not being creditable. 

One should perhaps be cautious not to present the 
appearance of discourtesy in declining the sympathy 
or help of friends, for this happens occasionally. 

It appears then that the presence of friends is, under 
all circumstances, choice -worthy. 



CHAPTER XII 

Intimacy, the chief object of Friendship. Its effect on 
the good and bad respectively 

MAY we not say then that, as seeing the beloved 
object is most prized by lovers and they choose this 
sense rather than any of the others because Love 

' is engendered in the eyes, 
With gazing fed ', 

in like manner intimacy is to friends most choice- 
worthy, Friendship being communion ? Again, as a 
man is to himself so is he to his friend ; now with 
respect to himself the perception of his own existence 
is choice-worthy, therefore it is also in respect of his 
friend. 

And besides, their Friendship is acted out in in- 
timacy, and so with good reason they desire this. 
And whatever in each man's opinion constitutes 
existence, or whatsoever it is for the sake of which they 
choose life, herein they wish their friends to join with 
them ; and so some men drink together, others gamble, 
others join in gymnastic exercises or hunting, others 
study philosophy together in each case spending their 
days together in that which they like best of all things 
in life, for since they wish to be intimate with their 



276 ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS BOOK ix 

friends they do and partake in those things whereby 
they think to attain this object. 

Therefore the Friendship of the wicked comes to be 
depraved ; for, being unstable, they share in what is 
bad and become depraved in being made like to one 
another : but the Friendship of the good is good, 
growing with their intercourse ; they improve also, 
as it seems, by repeated acts, and by mutual correction, 
for they receive impress from one another in the points 
which give them pleasure ; whence says the Poet, 

' Thou from the good good things shalt surely learn.' 

Here then we will terminate our discourse of Friend- 
ship. The next thing is to go into the subject of 
Pleasure. 



BOOK X 
CHAPTEB I 

Introductory 

NEXT, it would seem, follows a discussion respect- 
ing Pleasure, for it is thought to bo most closely 
bound up with our kind : and so men train the young 
guiding them on their course by the rudders of Pleasure 
and Pain. And to like and dislike what one ought is 
judged to be most important for the formation of good 
moral character : because these feelings extend all 
one's life through, giving a bias towards and exerting 
an influence on the side of Virtue and Happiness, since 
men choose what is pleasant and avoid what is painful. 

Subjects such as these then, it would seem, we 
ought by no means to pass by, and specially since 
they involve much difference of opinion. There are 
those who call Pleasure the Chief Good ; there are 
others who on the contrary maintain that it is exceed- 
ingly bad 1 (some perhaps from a real conviction that 
such is the case, other? from a notion that it is better, 
in reference to our life and conduct, to show up Pleasure 
as bad, even if it is not so really, arguing that, as the 
mass of men have a bias towards it and are the slaves 
of their pleasures, it is right to draw them to the con- 
trary, for that so they may possibly arrive at the 
mean 2 ). 

I confess I suspect the soundness of this policy ; in 
matters respecting men's feelings and actions theories 
are less convincing than facts : whenever, therefore, 
they are found conflicting with actual experience, 
they not only are despised but involve the truth in 
their fall : he, for instance, who deprecates Pleasure, 
if once seen to aim at it, gets the credit of backsliding 

1 See note p. 55. - Sec Bk. n, eh. ix. 



278 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK x 

to it as a thing which is altogether good, the mas3 
of men being incapable of nice distinctions. 

Real accounts, therefore, of such matters seem to 
be most expedient, not with a view to knowledge 
merely but to life and conduct : for they are believed 
as being in harmony with facts, and so they prevail 
with the wise to live in accordance with them. 

But of such considerations enough : let us now 
proceed to the current maxims respecting Pleasure. 



CHAPTER II 

The opinions of Eudoxus, and others, stated and dis- 
cussed 

Now Eudoxus thought Pleasure to be the Chief 
Good because he saw all, rational and irrational alike, 
aiming at it : and he argued that, since in all what 
was the object of choice must be good and what most 
so the best, the fact of all being drawn to the same 
thing proved this thing to be the best for all : ' For 
each,' he said, ' finds what is good for itself just as 
it does its proper nourishment, and so that which is 
good for all, and the object of the aim of all, is their 
Chief Good '. 

And his theories were received, not so much for 
their own sake, as because of his excellent moral 
character ; for he was thought to be eminently pos- 
sessed of perfect self-mastery, and therefore it was 
not thought that he said these things because he was 
a lover of Pleasure but that he really was so convinced. 

And he thought his position was not less proved 
by the argument from the contrary ; that is, since 
Pain was in itself an object of avoidance to all, the 
contrary must be in like manner an object of choice. 

Again ho urged that that is most choice -worthy 
which we choose, not by reason of, or with a view to 
anything further ; and that Pleasure is confessedly 



CHAP, n ETHTCS 279 

of this kind because no one ever goes on to ask to what 
purpose he is pleased, feeling that Pleasure is in itself 
choice-worthy. 

Again, that when added to any other good it makes 
it more choice-worthy ; as, for instance, to actions 
of justice, or perfected self -mastery ; and good can 
only be increased by itself. 

However, this argument at least seems to prove 
only that it belongs to the class of goods, and not 
that it does so more than anything else : for every 
good is more choice-worthy in combination with 
some other than when taken quite alone. In fact, it 
is by just such an argument that Plato proves that 
Pleasure is not the Chief Good l : ' For ', says he, 
' the life of Pleasure is more choice-worthy in com- 
bination with Practical Wisdom than apart from it ; 
but, if the compound be better, then simple Pleasure 
cannot be the Chief Good ; because the very Chief 
Good cannot by any addition become more choice- 
worthy than it is already ' : and it is obvious that 
nothing else can be the Chief Good, which by com- 
bination with any of the things in themselves good 
comes to be more choice-worthy. 

What is there then of such a nature (meaning, of 
course, whereof we can partake ; because that which 
we are in search of must be such) ? 

As for those who object that ' what all aim at is 
not necessarily good ', I confess I cannot see much 
in what they say, because what all think, we say is. 
And he who would cut away this ground from under 
us will not bring forward things more dependable : 
if the argument had rested on the desires of irrational 
creatures there might have been something in what 
he says, but, since the rational also desire Pleasure, 
how can this objection be allowed any weight ? And 
it may be that, even in the lower animals, there is 



1 See Bk. i, ch. v, ad fin. 



280 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK x 

some natural good principle above themselves which 
aims at the good peculiar to them. 

Nor does that seem to be sound which is urged 
respecting the argument from the contrary : I mean 
some people say ' it does not follow that Pleasure 
must be good because Pain is evil, since evil may be 
opposed to evil, and both evil and good to what is 
indifferent'. Such an argument is right enough in 
itself but does not hold in the present instance. 
If both Pleasure and Pain were bad both would 
have been objects of avoidance ; or if neither, then 
neither would have been, at all events they must 
have fared alike : but now men do plainly avoid the 
one as bad and choose the other as good, and so there 
is a complete opposition. 

Nor again is Pleasure therefore excluded from being 
a good because it does not belong to the class of quali- 
ties 2 : the acts of virtue are not qualities, neither is 
Happiness [yet surely both are goods]. 

Again, they say the Chief Good is limited but Plea- 
sure unlimited, in that it admits of degrees. 

Now if they judge this from the act of feeling Plea- 
sure then the same thing will apply to justice and 
all the other virtues, in respect of which clearly 
it is said that men are more of such and such char- 
acters (according to the different virtues) : they are 
more just or more brave, or one may practise justice 
and self-mastery more or less. 

If, on the other hand, they judge in respect of the 
Pleasures themselves, then it may be they miss the 
true cause, namely, that some are unmixed and others 
mixed : for just as health, being in itself limited, 
admits of degrees, why should not Pleasure do so and 
yet be limited ? in the former case we account for 



" The notion alluded to is that of the i(Y ; that there is 
no real substantial good except the ufirb dyaOov, and there- 
fore whatever is so called is so named in right of its parti- 
cipation in that. 



CHAI>. ii ETHICS 281 

it by the fact that there h not the same adjust- 
ment of parts in all men, nor one and the same 
always in the same individual : but health, though 
relaxed, remains up to a certain point, and differs in 
degrees ; and of course the same may be the case with 
Pleasure. 

Again, assuming the Chief Good to be perfect and 
all Movements 3 and Generations imperfect, they try to 
show that Pleasure is a Movement and a Generation. 

Yet they do not seem warranted in saying even 
that it is a Movement : for to every Movement are 
thought to belong swiftness or slowness, and if not 
in itself (as in the case of the universe), yet relatively : 
but to Pleasure neither of these belongs : for though 
one may have got quickly into the state of Pleasure, 
as into that of anger, one cannot be in the state 
quickly, 4 nor relatively to the state of any other 
person ; but we can walk or grow, and so on, quickly 
or slowly. 

Of course it is possible to change into the state of 
Pleasure quickly or slowly, but to act in the state 
(by which, I mean, have the feeling of Pleasure) 
quickly, is not possible. 

And' how can it be a Generation ? because, ac- 
cording to notions generally held, not any thing is 
generated from any thing, but a thing resolves itself 
into that out of which it was generated, and thus 



3 Movement is, according to Aristotle, of six kinds : 

From not being to being . . . Generation 

From being to not being . . . Destruction 

From being to being more . . Increase 

From being to being less . . Diminution 

From being here to being there Change of Place 
From being in this way to being 

in that Alteration 

4 A may go to sleep quicker than B, but cannot do more 
sleep in a given time. 



282 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK x 

of that of which Pleasure is a Generation Pain is a 
Destruction. So, they say that Pain is a lack of some- 
thing suitable to nature and Pleasure a supply of it. 

But these are affections of the body : now if Plea- 
sure really is supplying of somewhat suitable to nature, 
that must feel the Pleasure in which the supply takes 
place, therefore the body of course : yet it does not seem 
to be so. Neither then is Pleasure a supplying, only 
a person of course will be pleased when a supply takes 
place just as he will be pained when he is cut. 6 

This notion would seem to have arisen out of the 
Pains and Pleasures connected with natural nourish- 
ment ; because, when people have felt a lack and so 
have had Pain first, they, of course, are pleased with 
the supply of their lack. 

But this is not the case with all Pleasures: those 
attendant on mathematical studies, for instance, are 
unconnected with any Pain ; and of such as attend 
on the senses those which arise through the sense of 
Smell ; and again, many sounds, and sights, and 
memories, and hopes : now of what can these be 
Generations ? because there has been here no lack of 
any thing to be afterwards supplied. 

And to those who bring forward disgraceful Plea- 
sures we may reply that these are not really pleasant 
things ; for it does not follow because they are plea- 
sant to the ill-disposed that we are to admit that 
they are pleasant except to them ; just as we should 
not say that those things are really wholesome, or 
sweet, or bitter, which are so to the sick, or those 
objects white which give that impression to people 
labouring under ophthalmia. 

Or we might say thus, that the Pleasures are choice- 
worthy but not as derived from these sources : just 
as wealth is, but not as the price of treason ; or health, 
but not on the terms of eating anything however 
loathsome. 

6 Probably a surgical metaphor. [Eo.] 



CHAP, n ETHICS 283 

Or again, may we not say that Pleasures differ 
in kind ? those derived from honourable objects, 
for instance, are different from those arising from 
disgraceful ones ; and it is not possible to experience 
the Pleasure of the just man without being just, or 
of the musical man without being musical ; and so 
on of others. 

The distinction commonly drawn between the 
friend and the flatterer would seem to show clearly 
either that Pleasure is not a good, or that there are 
different kinds of Pleasure : for the former is thought 
to have good as the object of his intercourse, the latter 
Pleasure only ; and this last is reproached, but the 
former men praise as having different objects in his 
intercourse. 

Again, no one would choose to live with a child's 
intellect all his life through, though receiving the 
highest possible Pleasure from such objects as children 
receive it from ; or to take Pleasure in doing any of 
the most disgraceful things, though sure never to be 
pained. 

There are many things also about which we should 
be diligent even though they brought no pleasure ; 
as seeing, remembering, knowing, p;s-essing the 
various Excellences ; and the fact that Pleasures do 
follow on these naturally makes no difference, because 
we should certainly choose them even though no 
Pleasure resulted from them. 

It seems then to be plain that Pleasure is not the 
Chief Good, nor is even' kind of it choice-worthy : 
and that there are some choice-worthy in themselves, 
differing in kind, i.e., in the sources from which they 
are derived. Let this then suffice by way of an account 
of the current maxims respecting Pleasure and Pain. 



284 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK x 



CHAPTER III 

That Pleasure is a ' whole ', and so distinguished from 
any kind of Movement 

Now what it is, and how characterized, will be 
more plain if we take up the subject afresh. 

An act of Sight is thought to be complete at any 
moment ; that is to say, it lacks nothing the ac- 
cession of which subsequently will complete its whole 
nature. 

Well, Pleasure resembles this, because it is a 
whole, as one may say ; and one could not at any 
moment of time take a Pleasure whose whole nature 
would be completed by its lasting for a longer time. 
For this reason it is not a Movement : for all 
Movement takes place in time of certain duration and 
has a certain end to accomplish ; for instance, the 
Movement of house-building is then only complete 
when the builder has produced what he intended, 
that is, either in the whole time [necessary to com- 
plete the whole design], or in the final moment. 1 But 
all the subordinate Movements are incomplete in the 
parts of the time, and are different in kind from the 
whole movement and from one another (I mean, 
for instance, that the fitting the stones together is a 
Movement different from that of fluting the column, 
and both again from the construction of the Temple 
as a whole : but this last is complete as lacking noth- 
ing to the result proposed ; whereas that of the 
basement, or of the triglyph, is incomplete, because 
each is a Movement of a part merely). 

As I said then, they differ in kind, and you cannot 
at any time you choose find a Movement complete 
in its whole nature, but, if at all, in the whole time 
requisite. 

1 That is, subordinate Movements are complete before 
ho whole Movement is. 



CHAP, in ETHICS 285 

And so it is with the Movement of walking and all 
others : for, though all motion be a Movement from one 
place to another place, yet of it too there are different 
kinds, flying, walking, leaping, and such like. And 
not only so, but there are different kinds even in 
walking : the where-from and where-to are not the 
same in the whole Course as in a portion of it ; nor 
in one portion as in another ; nor is crossing this 
line the same as crossing that, because a man is not 
merely crossing a line but a line in a given place, and 
this is in a different place from that. 

Of Movement I have discoursed exactly in another 
treatise. I will now therefore only say that it seems 
not to be complete at any given moment ; and that 
minor movements are incomplete and specifically 
different, since the whence and whither constitute 
different species. 

But of Pleasure the whole nature is complete at 
any given moment. It is plain then that Pleasure and 
Movement must be different from one another, and 
that Pleasure belongs to the class of things whole 
and complete. And this might appear also from the 
impossibility of moving except in time, whereas there 
is none with respect to the sensation of Pleasure for 
what exists at the very present moment is a kind of 
' whole '. 

From these considerations then it is plain that 
people are not warranted in saying that Pleasure is 
a Movement or a Generation, because these terms 
are not applicable to all things, only to such as are 
divisible and not 'wholes': I mean that of an act 
of Sight there is no Generation, nor is there of a point, 
nor of a monad, nor is any one of these a Movement or a 
Generation : neither then of Pleasure is there Move- 
ment or Generation, because it is, as one may say, 
' a whole '. ' 2 

" Pleasure is so instantaneous a sensation, that it can- 
not be conceived divisible or incomplete : tlu; longest 



286 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK x 

CHAPTER IV 

Aristotle's own account of Pleasure 

Now since every Percipient Faculty works upon 
the Object answering to it, and perfectly the Faculty 
in a good state upon the most excellent of the Objects 
within its range (for Perfect Working J is thought 
to be much what I have described ; and we will not 
raise any question about saying ' the Faculty ' works, 
instead of ' that subject wherein the Faculty resides '), 
in each case the best working is that of the Faculty 
in its best state upon the best of the Objects answer- 
ing to it. And this will be, further, most perfect and 
most pleasant : for Pleasure is attendant upon the 
exercise of every sense, and in like manner on every 
intellectual operation and speculation ; and that is 
most pleasant which is most perfect, and that most 
perfect which is the Working of the best Faculty upon 
the most excellent of the Objects within its range. 

And Pleasure perfects the Working. But Pleasure 
does not perfect in the same way as the Faculty and 
Object of Perception do, being good ; just as health 
and the physician are not in similar senses causes of a 
healthy state. 

And that Pleasure does arise upon the exercise of 
every Percipient Faculty is evident, for we commonly 
say that sights and sounds are pleasant. It is plain 
also that this is specially the case when the Faculty 
is most excellent and works upon a similar Object : 
and when both the Object and Faculty of Perception 
are such, Pleasure will always exist, supposing of 
course an agent and a patient. 

continued Pleasure is only a succession of single sparks, so 
rapid as to give the appearance of a stream, of light. 

1 Better, ' Perfect exercise ' (i.e. of faculty). This 
substitution should be made throughout the ensuing 
discussion. [ED.] 



CHAP, iv ETHICS 287 

Furthermore, Pleasure perfects the act of Working 
not in the way of an inherent state 2 but as a super- 
vening finish, such as is bloom in people at their prime. 
Therefore so long as the Object of intellectual or 
sensitive Perception is such as it should be and also 
the Faculty which discerns or realizes the Object, 
there will bo Pleasure in the working : because when 
that which has the capacity of being acted on and 
that which is apt to act are alike and similarly related, 
the same result follows naturally. 

How is it then that no one feels Pleasure continu- 
ously ? Is it not that he wearies, because all human 
faculties are incapable of unintermitting exertion ? 
and so, of course, Pleasure does not arise either, be- 
cause that follows upon the Working. But there 
are some things which please when new, but after- 
wards not in the like way, for exactly the same reason : 
at first the mind is roused and works on these Objects 
with its powers at full tension, just as they who are 
gazing steadfastly at anything ; but afterwards the 
act of Working is not of the kind it was at first, but 
careless, and so the Pleasure too is dulled. 

Again, a person may conclude that all men grasp 
at Pleasure, because all aim likewise at Life and Life 
is an act of Working, and every man works at and with 
those things which also he best likes ; the musical 
man, for instance, exercises his hearing at music ; the 
studious man his intellect at speculative questions, 
and so forth. And Pleasure perfects the acte of 
Working, and so Life after which men grasp. Xo 
wonder then that they aim also at Pleasure, because 
to each it perfects Life, which is itself choice-worthy. 
(We will take leave to omit the question whether 
we choose Life for Pleasure's sake or Pleasure for Life's 
sake ; because these two plainly are closely connected 

2 Better, ' Habit ' or ' Trained Faculty '. There is 
unfortunately no technical English word which adequately 
represents the Greek. [D.] 



288 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK x 

and admit not of separation ; since Pleasure comes 
not into being without Working, and again, every 
Working Pleasure perfects. 

And this is one reason why Pleasures are thought 
to differ in kind, because we suppose that things 
which differ in kind must be perfected by things so 
differing (it plainly being the case with the produc- 
tions of Nature and Art, as animals, and trees, and 
pictures, and statues, and houses, and furniture) ; and 
so we suppose that in like manner acts of Working 
which are different in kind are perfected by things 
differing in kind. Now Intellectual Workings differ 
specifically from those of the Senses, and these last 
from one another ; therefore so do the Pleasures which 
perfect them. 

This may be shown also from the intimate con- 
nexion subsisting between each Pleasure and the 
Working which it perfects I mean, that the Plea- 
sure proper to any Working increases that Working ; 
for they who work with Pleasure sift all things more 
closely and carry them out to a greater degree of nicety. 
For instance, those men become geometricians who take 
Pleasure in geometry, and they apprehend particular 
points more completely. In like manner men who are 
fond of music, or architecture, or anything else, 
improve each on his own pursuit, because they feel 
Pleasure in them. Thus the Pleasures aid in increasing 
the Workings, and things which do so aid are 
proper and peculiar : but the things which are proper 
and peculiar to others specifically different are them- 
selves also specifically different. 

Yet even more clearly may this be shown from the 
fact that the Pleasures arising from one kind of Work- 
ings hinder other W T orkings ; for instance, people 
who are fond of flute-music cannot keep their at- 
tention to conversation or discourse when they catch 
the sound of a flute, because they take more Pleasure 
in tl ute-playing than in the Working they are at 
the time engaged on ; in other words, the Pleasure 



CHAP, iv ETHICS 289 

attendant on flute -playing destroys the Working of 
conversation or discourse [see p. 286, note]. 

Much the same kind of thing takes place in other 
cases, when a person is engaged in two different Work- 
ings at the same time : that is, the pleasanter of the 
two keeps pushing out the other, and, if the disparity 
in pleasantness be great, then more and more till a 
man even ceases altogether to work at the other. 

This is the reason why, when we are very much 
pleased with anything whatever, we do nothing else, 
and it is only when we are but moderately pleased 
with one occupation that we vary it with another : 
people, for instance, who eat sweetmeats in the theatre 
do so most when the performance is indifferent. 

Since then the proper and peculiar Pleasure gives 
accuracy to the Workings and makes them more en- 
during and better of their kind, while those Pleasures 
which are foreign to them mar them, it is plain there 
is a wide difference between them : in fact, Pleasures 
foreign to any Working have pretty much the same 
effect as the Pains proper to it, 3 which, in fact, destroy 
the Workings. I mean, if one man dislikes writing, 
or another calculation, the one does not write, the other 
does not calculate ; because, in each case, the Working 
is attended with some Pain. So then contrary effects 
are produced upon the Workings by the Pleasures 
and Pains proper to them, by which I mean those 
wliich arise upon the Working, in itself, independently 
of any other circumstances. As for the Pleasures 
foreign to a Working, we have said already that they 
produce a similar effect to the Pain proper to it ; that 
is, they destroy the Working, only not in like way. 

Well then, as Workings differ from one another 
in goodness and badness, some being fit objects of 
choice, others of avoidance, and others in their nature 

y A man is as effectually hindered from taking a walk 
by the counter-attraction of reading a novel, as by the 
direct pain of gout in the feet. 



290 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK x 

indifferent, Pleasures are similarly related ; since its own 
proper Pleasure attends on each Working. Of cour.se 
that proper to a good Working is good, that proper 
to a bad bad : for even the desires for what is noble 
and praiseworthy, and for what is base blameworthy. 

Furthermore, the Pleasures attendant on Workings 
are more closely connected with them even than the 
desires after them : for these last are separate both in 
time and nature, but the former are close to the Work- 
ings, and so indivisible from them as to raise a question 
whether the Working and the Pleasure are identical. 
But Pleasure does not seem to be an Intellectual 
Operation nor a Faculty of Perception, because that 
is absurd ; but yet it gives some the impression of 
being the same from not being separated from these. 

As then the Workings are different so are their 
Pleasures ; now Sight differs from Touch in purity, 
and Hearing and Smelling from Taste ; therefore, 
in like manner, do their Pleasures ; and again, In- 
tellectual Pleasures from these Sensual, and the differ- 
ent kinds both of Intellectual and Sensual from one 
another. 

It is thought, moreover, that each animal has a 
Pleasure proper to itself, as it has a proper Work, 
that Pleasure of course which is attendant on the 
Working. And the soundness of this will appear 
upon particular inspection : for horse, dog, and man 
have different Pleasures ; as Heraclitus says, an ass 
would sooner have hay than gold ; in other words, 
provender is pleasanter to asses than gold. So then 
the Pleasures of animals specifically different are also 
specifically different, but those of the same, we may 
reasonably suppose, are without difference. 

Yet in the case of human creatures they differ 
not a little : for the very same things please some and 
pain others : arid what are painful and hateful to 
some are pleasant to and liked by others. The same 
is the case with sweet things : the same will not seem so 
to the man in a fever as to him who is in health : nor 



CHAP, v ETHICS 291 

will the invalid and the person in robust health have 
the same notion of warmth. The same is the case 
with other things also. 

Now in all such cases that is held to be which im- 
presses the good man with the notion of being such and 
such ; and if this is a second maxim (as it is usually 
held to be), and Virtue, that is, the Good man, in that 
he is such, is the measure of everything, then those 
must be real Pleasures which give him the impression 
of being so and those things pleasant in which he 
takes Pleasure. Nor is it at all astonishing that what 
are to him unpleasant should give another person the 
impression of being pleasant, for men are liable to many 
corruptions and marrings ; and the things in question 
are not pleasant really, only to these particular per- 
sons, and to them only as being thus disposed. 

Well, of course, you may say, it is obvious that we 
must not assert those which are confessedly disgrace- 
ful to be real Pleasures, except to depraved tastes : but 
of those which are thought to be good, what kind, or 
which, must we say is The Pleasure of Man ? Is 
not the answer plain from considering what are his 
proper faculties, because the Pleasures follow upon the 
exercise of these ? 

Whether then there be one or several Workings 
which belong to the perfect and blessed man, the 
Pleasures which perfect these Workings must be said 
to be specially and properly The Pleasures of Man ; 
and all the rest in a secondary sense, and in various 
degrees according as the Workings are related to those 
highest and best or . 

CHAPTER V 

A recapitulation of former statements respecting Happiness 

Now that we have spoken about the excellences 
of both kinds, and Friendship in its varieties, and 
Pleasures, it remains to sketch out Happiness, since 



292 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK x 

we assume that to be the one end of all human things : 
and \ve shall save time and trouble by recapitulating 
what was stated before. 

Well then, we said that it is not a State merely, 
because, if it were, it might belong to one who slept 
all his life through and merely vegetated, or to one 
who fell into very great calamities ; and so, if these 
possibilities displease us and we would rather put it into 
the rank of some kind of Working l (as was also said 
before), and Workings are of different kinds (some 
being necessary and choice-worthy with a view to other 
things, while others are so in themselves), it is plain 
we must rank Happiness among those choice-worthy 
for their own sakes and not among those which are so 
with a view to something further : because Happiness 
has no lack of anything but is self-sufficient. 

By choice-worthy in themselves are meant those 
from which nothing is sought beyond the act of Work- 
ing : and of this kind are thought to be the actions 
according to Virtue, because doing what is noble and 
excellent is one of those things which are choice-worthy 
for their own sake alone. 

And again, such amusements as are pleasant ; 
because people do not choose them with any further 
purpose : in fact they receive more harm than profit 
from them, neglecting their persons and their pro- 
perty. Still the common run of those who are judged 
happy take refuge in such pastimes, which is the 
reason why they who have varied talent in such are 
highly esteemed among despots ; because they make 
themselves pleasant in those things which these aim 
at, and these accordingly want such men. 

Now these things are thought to be appurtenances 
of Happiness because princes spend their leisure 
herein. Yet, it may be, we cannot argue from the 
example of such men, because there is neither Virtue 
not Intellect necessarily involved in having power, 



1 i.e. c exercise of Faculty '. [Eo.] 



CHAP, v ETHICS 293 

and yet these are the only sources of good Workings. 
Nor does it follow that because these men, never hav- 
ing tasted pure and generous Pleasure, take refuge 
in bodily ones, vre are therefore to believe them to be 
more choice- worthy ; for children too believe that 
those things are most excellent which are precious in 
their eyes. 

We may well believe that, as children and men have 
different ideas as to what is precious, so too have the 
bad and the good : therefore, as we have many times 
said, those things are really precious and pleasant 
which seem so to the good man : and as to each in- 
dividual that Working is most choice-worthy which is 
in accordance with his own state, to the good man that 
is so which is in accordance with Virtue. 

Happiness then stands not in amusement ; in fact 
the very notion is absurd of the End being amuse- 
ment, and of one's toiling and enduring hardness all 
one's lite long with a view to amusement : for every- 
thing in the world, so to speak, we choose with some 
further End in view, except Happiness, for that is 
the End comprehending all others. Now to take 
pains and to labour with a view to amusement is 
plainly foolish and very childish : but to amuse one's 
self with a view to steady employment afterwards, 
as Anacharsis says, is thought to be right : for amuse- 
ment is like rest, and men want rest being unable 
to labour continuously. 

Relaxation, therefore, is not an End, because it is 
adopted with a view to Working afterwards. 

Again, it is held that the Happy Life must be one 
in the way of Excellence, and this is accompanied by 
earnestness - and stands not in amusement. Moreover 
those things which are done in earnest, we say, are 
better than tilings merely ludicrous and joined with 



- The Greek word, thus rendered literally, really im- 
plies ' goodness ', the gravity of a good man dealing with 
important issues. [Eo.] 



294 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK x 

amusement : and we say that the Working of the 
better part, or the better man, is more earnest, 3 and 
the Working of the better is at once better and more 
capable of Happiness. 

Then, again, as for bodily Pleasures, any ordinary 
person, or even a slave, might enjoy them, just as 
well as the best man living. But Happiness no one 
supposes a slave to share seeing that he does not share 
in what we call real life (i.e. that of the citizen) ; 
because Happiness stands not in such pastimes but 
in the Workings in the way of Excellence, as has also 
been stated before. 



CHAPTER VI 

Thai Happiness consists, primarily, in the Exercise of 
Pure Intellect ; secondarily, in that of the other Excellences 

Now if Happiness is a Working in the way of Ex- 
cellence, of course that Excellence must be the highest, 
that is to say, the Excellence of the best Principle. 
Whether then this best Principle is Intellect, or some 
other, which is thought naturally to rule and to lead 
and to conceive of noble and divine things (whether 
being in its own nature divine or the most divine of 
all our internal Principles), the Working of this in 
accordance with its own proper Excellence must be 
the perfect Happiness. 

That it is Contemplative has been already stated : 
and this would seem to be consistent with what we 
said before and with truth: for, in the first place, 
this Working is of the highest kind, since the Intellect 
is the highest of our internal Principles and the sub- 
jects with which it is conversant the highest of all 
which fall within the range of our knowledge. 

Next, it is also most Continuous : for we are better 

a Sec note 2, page 293. 



CHAP, vi ETHICS 295 

able to contemplate than to do anything else what- 
ever, continuously. 

Again, we think Pleasure must be in some way 
an ingredient in Happiness, and of all Workings in 
accordance with Excellence that in the way of Wisdom 
is confessedly most pleasant : at least the pursuit of 
Wisdom is thought to contain Pleasures admirable 
for purity and permanence ; and it is reasonable 
to suppose that the employment is more pleasant to 
those who have mastered, than to those who are yet 
seeking for, it. 

And the Self-sufficiency which people speak of 
will attach chiefly to the Contemplative Working. 
Of course the actual necessaries of life are needed 
alike by the wise man, and the just man, and all the 
other characters ; but supposing all sufficiently sup- 
plied with these, the just man needs people towards 
whom, and in concert with whom, to practise his 
justice ; and in like manner the man of perfected 
self-mastery, and the brave man, and so on of the 
rest. Whereas the philosopher can contemplate and 
speculate even when quite alone, and the more entirely 
he deserves the appellation the more able is he to do 
so : it may be he can do better for having fellow- 
workers but still he is certainly most Self-sufficing. 

Again, this alone would seem to be desired for its 
own sake, since nothing results from it beyond the fact 
of having contemplated ; whereas from all things which 
are objects of moral action we do mean to get something 
beside the doing them, be the same more or less. 

Also, Happiness is thought to stand in perfect 
leisure : ; for we toil that wo may rest, and war that 
we may be at peace. Now all the Practical Virtues 

1 The clause immediately following indicates that Aris- 
totle felt this statement to bo at iirst sight startling. 
Happiness having been all the way through connected 
with eW/ryeia ; but the statement illustrates and contirnis 
what was said in noto -, p. 7. 



296 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK x 

require either government or war for their Working, 
and the actions regarding these are thought to exclude 
rest ; those of war entirely, because no one chooses 
war, nor prepares for war, for war's sake : he would 
indeed be thought a bloodthirsty villain who should 
make enemies of his friends to secure the existence 
of fighting and bloodshed. The Working also of the 
statesman excludes the idea of rest, and, beside the 
actual work of government, seeks for power and dig- 
nities or at least Happiness for the man himself and 
his fellow-citizens a Happiness distinct from political 
science for which also we are in search as being a 
different and distinct thing. 

If then of all the actions in accordance with the 
various virtues those of government and war are pre- 
eminent in honour and greatness, and these are rest- 
less, and aim at some further End, and are not choice- 
worthy for their own sakes, but the Working of the 
Intellect, being apt for contemplation, is thought to 
excel in earnestness, and to aim at no End beyond it- 
self, and to have Pleasure of its own which helps to 
increase the Working ; and if the attributes of Self- 
Sufficiency, and leisureliness, and unweariedness (as 
far as is compatible with the infirmity of human nature), 
and all other attributes of the highest Happiness, 
plainly belong to this Working, this must be perfect 
Happiness, if attaining a complete duration of life ; 
which condition is added because none of the points 
of Happiness is incomplete. 

But such a life will be higher than mere human 
nature, because a man will live thus, not in so far as 
he is man, but in so far as there is in him a divine 
Principle : and in proportion as this Principle excels 
his composite nature, so far does the Working thereof 
excel that in accordance with any other kind of Ex- 
cellence : and therefore, if pure Reason, as compared 
with human nature, is divine, so too will the life in 
accordance with it be divine compared with man's 
ordinary life. 



CHAP, vi ETHICS 297 

Yet must wo not give ear to those who bid one 
as man to mind only man's affairs, or as mortal only 
mortal things ; but, so far as we can, make ourselves 
like immortals and do all with a view to living in 
accordance with the highest Principle in us ; for small 
as it may be in bulk yet in power and preciousness 
it far more excels all the others [than they it in bulk]. 

In fact this Principle would seem to constitute 
each man's ' Self ', since it is supreme and above 
all others in goodness : it would be absurd then for 
a man not to choose his own life but that of some 
other. 

And here will apply an observation made before, 
that whatever is proper to each is naturally best and 
pleasantest to him : such then is to Man the life in 
accordance with pure Reason (since this Principle is 
most truly Man), and if so, then it is also the happiest. 

And second in degree of Happiness will be that 
Life which is in accordance with the other kind of 
Excellence [i.e. Moral] for the Workings in accordance 
with this are proper to Man. I mean, we do actions 
of justice, courage, and the other virtues, towards one 
another, in contracts, services of different kinds, and 
in all kinds of actions and feelings too, by observing 
what is befitting for each : and all these plainly are 
proper to man. Further, the Excellence of the Moral 
character is thought to result in some points from 
physical circumstances, and to be, in many, very 
closely connected with the passions. 

Again, Practical Wisdom [i.e. Prudence] and Ex- 
cellence of the Moral character are very closely united, 
since the Principles of Practical Wisdom are in accord- 
ance with the Moral Virtues and these are right when 
they accord with Practical Wisdom. 

These moreover, as bound up with the passions, must 
belong to the composite nature, and the Excellences 
or Virtues of the composite nature are proper to man ; 
therefore so too will be the life and Happiness which 
is in accordance with them. But that of the Pure 



298 ARISTOTLE S BOOK x 

Reason is separate and distinct : and let this suffice 
upon the subject, since great exactness is beyond our 
purpose. 

It would seem, moreover, to require supply of 
external goods to a small degree, or certainly less 
than the Moral Happiness ; for, as far as necessaries 
of life are concerned, we will suppose both characters 
to need them equally (though, in point of fact, the 
public man does take more pains about his person 
and all that kind of thing ; there will really be very 
little difference), but when we come to consider their 
activities there will be found a great difference. 

I mean, the liberal man must have money to do 
his liberal actions with, and the just man to meet 
his engagements (for mere intentions are uncertain, 
and even those who are unjust make a pretence of 
wishing to do justly), and the brave man must have 
power, if he is to perform any of the actions which 
appertain to his particular Virtue, and the man of 
perfected self-mastery must have opportunity of 
temptation, else how shall he or any of the others 
display his real character ? 

(By the way, a question is sometimes raised, whether 
the purpose or the actions have most to do with Virtue, 
since it consists in both : it is plain that the perfection 
of virtuous action requires both.) But for the actions 
many things are required, and the greater and more 
numerous they are the more. But as for the man 
engaged in Contemplative Speculation, not only are 
such things unnecessary for his Working, but, so to 
speak, they are even hindrances, i.e. as regards the 
Contemplation at least ; of course in so far as he is 
Man and lives in society he chooses to do what Virtue 
requires, and so he will need such things for maintain- 
ing his character as Man though not as a speculative 
philosopher. 

And that the perfect Happiness must be a kind 
of Contemplative Working [i.e. Activity] may appear 
also from the following consideration. Our conception 



CHAP, vi ETHICS 299 

of the gods is that they are above all blessed and happy : 
now what kind of Moral actions are we to attribute 
to them ? Those of justice ? Nay, will they not be 
set in a ridiculous light if represented as forming con- 
tracts, and restoring deposits, and so on ? Well then, 
shall we picture them performing brave actions, with- 
standing objects of fear and meeting dangers, because 
it is noble to do so ? Or liberal ones ? But to whom 
shall they be giving ? And further, it is absurd to 
think they have money or anything of the kind. 
And as for the actions of perfected self-mastery, what 
can theirs be ? Would it not be a degrading praise 
that they had no bad desires ? In short, if one fol- 
lowed the subject into all details all the circumstances 
connected with Moral actions would appear trivial and 
unworthy of gods. 

Still, everyone believes that they live, and there- 
fore that they are active because it is not supposed that 
they sleep their time away like Endymion : now if 
from a living being you take away Action, still more 
if Creation, what remains but Contemplation ? So 
then the Activity of the god,?, eminent in blessed- 
ness, will be one apt for Contemplative Speculation: 
and of all human Activities that will have the great- 
est capacity for Happiness which is nearest akin to 
this. 

A corroboration of which position is the fact that 
the other animals do not partake of Happiness, being 
completely shut out from any such Activity. 

To the gods then all their life is blessed, and to men 
in so far as there is in it some copy of such Activity; 
but of the other animals none is happy because it in 
no way shares in Contemplative Speculation. 

Happiness then is coextensive with this Contem- 
plative Speculation, and in proportion as people have 
tbe act of Contemplation so far have they aVso the 
being happy, not incidentally, but as a necessary 
concomitant of Contemplative Speculation, because it 
is in itself precious. 



300 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK x 



External prosperity, how far necessary to Happiness 

So Happiness must be a kind of contemplative 
Speculation ; but since it is Man we are speaking of 
he will need likewise External Prosperity, because his 
Nature is not by itself sufficient for Speculation, but 
there must be health of body, and nourishment, and 
tendance of all kinds. 

However, it must not be thought, because without 
external goods a man cannot enjoy high Happiness, 
that therefore he will require many and great goods 
in order to be happy : for neither Self-sufficiency, 
nor Action, stands in Excess, and it is quite possible 
to act nobly without being ruler of sea and land, since 
even with moderate means a man may act in accordance 
with Virtue. 

And this may be clearly seen in that men in private 
stations are thought to act justly, not merely no less 
than men in power but even more. It will be quite 
enough that just so much should belong to a man as 
is necessary, for his life will be happy who works in 
accordance with Virtue. 

Solon perhaps drew a fair picture of the Happy, 
when he said that they are men moderately supplied 
with external goods, who have achieved the most 
noble deeds, as he thought, and who have lived with 
perfect self-mastery : for it is quite possible for men 
of moderate means to act as they ought. 

Anaxagoras also seems to have conceived of the 
Happy man as not either rich or powerful, saying 
that he should not wonder if he were accounted a 
strange man in the judgment of the multitude, for 
they judge by outward circumstances of which alone 
they have any perception. 

And thus the opinions of the Wise seem to be ac- 
cordant with our account of the matter : of course 



CHAP, vm ETHICS 301 

such things carry some weight, but truth, in matters 
of moral action, is judged from facts and from actual 
life for herein rests the decision. So what we should 
do is to examine the proceeding statements by refer- 
ring them to facts and to actual life, and when they har- 
monize with facts we may accept them, when they are 
at variance with them conceive of them as mere theories. 

Xow he that works in accordance with, and pays 
observance to Reason, and tends this, seems likely 
to be both in the best frame of mind and dearest to 
the gods : because if, as is thought, any care is be- 
stowed on human things by the gods, then it must 
be reasonable to think" that they take pleasure in 
what is best and most akin to themselves (and this 
must be the reason) ; and that they requite with 
kindness those who love and honour this most, as 
paying observances to what is dear to them, and as 
acting rightly and nobly. And it is quite obvious 
that the Philosopher chiefly combines all these : he 
is therefore dearest to the god?, and it is probable 
that he is at the same time most Happy. 

Thus then on this view also the Philosopher will be 
most Happy. 

CHAPTER Vni 

Introductory to the Politics 

Now then that we have said enough in our sketchy 
kind of way on these subjects (I mean, on the Vir- 
tues, and also on Friendship and Pleasure), are we 
to suppose that our original purpose is completed 1 
Must we not rather acknowledge, what is commonly 
said, that in matters of moral action mere Speculation 
and Knowledge is not the real End but rather Prac- 
tice. And if so, then neither in respect of Virtue is 
Knowledge enough ; we rnu?t further strive to have 
and exert it, and take whatever other means there are 
of becoming good. 



302 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK x 

Now if arguments were of themselves sufficient 
to make men good, they would justly, as Tiieognis 
observes, have reaped numerous and great rewards, 
and the thing to do would be to provide them. But 
in point of fact, while they plainly have the power 
to guide and stimulate the generous among the young 
and to base upon true virtuous principle any noble 
and truly high-minded disposition, they as plainly 
are powerless to guide the mass of men to Virtue and 
goodness. It is not their nature to be amenable to 
a sense of shame but only to fear ; nor to abstain from 
what is low and mean because it is disgraceful to do it 
but because of the punishment attached to it. In fact, 
as they live at the beck and call of passion, they pur- 
sue their own proper pleasures and the means of secur- 
ing them, and they avoid the contrary pains ; but as 
for what is noble and truly pleasurable they have not 
an idea of it, inasmuch as they have never tasted of it. 

Men such as these then what mere words can trans- 
form ? No, indeed ! It is either actually impossible, 
or a task of no mean difficulty, to alter by words what 
has been of old taken into men's very dispositions ; 
and, it may be, it is a ground for contentment if with 
all the means and appliances for goodness in our 
hands we can attain to Virtue. 

The formation of a virtuous character some ascribe 
to Nature, some to Custom, and some to Teaching. 
Now Nature's part, be it what it may, obviously does 
not rest with us, but belongs to those who in the 
truest sense are fortunate, by reason of certain divine 
agency. 

Then, as for Words and Precept, they, it is to be 
feared, will not avail with all ; but it may be neces- 
sary for the mind of the disciple to have been pre- 
viously prepared for liking and disliking as he ought, 
just as the soil must, to nourish the seed sown. For 
he that lives in obedience to passion cannot hear any 
advice that would dissuade him, nor, if he heard, 
understand. Now him that is thus how can one 



CHAP, vnr ETHICS 303 

reform ? In fact, generally, passion is not thought 
to yield to Reason but to brute force. So then there 
must be to begin with, a kind of affinity to Virtue in 
the disposition which must cleave to what is honourable 
and loath what is disgraceful. But to get right guid- 
ance towards Virtue from the earliest youth is not 
easy unless one is brought up under laws of such kind ; 
because living with self-mastery and endurance is not 
pleasant to the mass of men, and specially not to the 
young. For this reason their upbringing and manner 
of living generally ought to be the subject of legal 
regulation, because things when become habitual 
will not be disagreeable. 

Yet perhaps it is not sufficient that men while 
young should get right nurture and tendance, but, in- 
asmuch as they will have to practise and become 
accustomed to certain tilings even after they have 
attained to man's estate, we shall want laws on these 
points as well, and, in fine, respecting one's whole 
life. For the mass of men are amenable to com- 
pulsion rather than Reason, and to punishment rather 
than to a sense of honour. 

And therefore some men hold that while lawgivers 
should employ the sense of honour to exhorf and 
guide men to Virtue, under the notion that they will 
then obey who have been well trained in habits, they 
should impose chastisement and penalties on those 
who disobey and are of less promising nature, and 
expel entirely the incurable. Because the good man 
and he who lives under a sense of honour will be 
obedient to reason ; and the baser sort, who grasp at 
pleasure, will be kept in check, like beasts of burthen 
by pain. Therefore also they say that the pains 
should be such as are most contrary to the pleasures 
which are liked. 

As has been said already, he who is to be good 
must have been well brought up and habituated, and 
then live accordingly under good institution?, r:nd 
never do what is low and mean, either against or with 



304 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK x 

his will. Now these objects can be attained only by 
men living in accordance with some guiding Intellect 
and right order, with power to back them. 

As for the Parental Rule, it possesses neither strength 
not compulsory power, nor in fact does the Rule of 
any one man, unless he is a king or some one in like 
case ; but the Law has power to compel, and it is a 
declaration emanating from Practical Wisdom and 
Intellect. And while people feel enmity towards 
their fellow-men who oppose their impulses, however 
rightly they may do so, the Law, on the contrary, is 
not the object of hatred, though enforcing right rules. 

The Lacedaemonian is nearly the only State in which 
the framer of the Constitution has made any pro- 
vision, it would seem, respecting the upbringing and 
manner of living of the people. In most States these 
points are entirely neglected, and each man lives just 
as he likes, ruling his wife and children Cyclops-fashion. 1 

Of course, the best thing would be that there should 
be a right Public System [and that we should be able 
to carry it out] : but, since as a public matter those 
points are neglected, the duty would seem to devolve 
upon each individual to contribute to the cause of 
Virtue with his own children and friends, or at least 
to make this his aim and purpose ; and this, it would 
seem, from what has been said, he will be best able 
to do by learning how to make laws. For all public 
systems, it is plain, are formed by the instrumentality 
of laws and those are good which are formed by that 
of good laws : whether they are written or unwritten, 
whether they are applied to the training of one or 
many, will not, it seems, make any difference, just as 
it does not in music, gymnastics, or any other such 
accomplishments, which are gained by practice. 

For just as in Communities laws and customs pre- 
vail, so too in families the express commands of the 

1 Odyssey, ix, 114. Each Cyclops is pictured as ,1 lord 
unto himself and his family. [En.] 



CHAP, vm ETHICS 305 

Head, and customs also and even more in the latter, 
because of blood-relationship and the benefits con- 
ferred ; for there you have, to begin with, people 
who have affection and are naturally obedient to the 
authority which controls them. 

Then, furthermore, Private training has advantages 
over Public, as in the case of the healing art ; for 
instance, as a general rule, a man who is in a fever 
should keep quiet, and starve ; but in a particular 
case, perhaps, this may not hold good; or, to take a 
different illustration, the boxer will not use the same 
way of fighting with all antagonists. 

It would seem then that the individual will be most 
exactly attended to under Private care, because so 
each will be more likely to obtain what is expedient 
for him. Of course, whether in the art of healing, or 
gymnastics, or any other, a man will treat indi vidual 
cases the better for being acquainted with general 
rules, e,g., ' that so and so is good for all, or for men 
in such and such cases ' ; because general maxims are 
not only said to be but are the object-matter of science. 
Still this is no reason against the possibility of a man's 
taking excellent care of some one case, though he pos- 
sess no scientific knowledge, if from experience he is 
exactly acquainted with what happens in each point ; 
just as some people are thought to doctor themselves 
best though they would be wholly unable to administer 
relief to others. Yet it may seem to be necessary 
nevertheless, for one who wishes to become an expert 
and well acquainted with the theory of his profession, 
to have recourse to general principles and ascertain 
all their capacities : for we have already stated that 
these are the object-matter of science. 

If then it appears that we may become good through 
the instrumentality of laws, of course whoso wishes to 
make men better by a system of care and training must 
try to become expert in law-making ; for to treat skilfully 
just any one who may be put before you is not what any 
ordinary person can do, but, if any one, he who has 



306 ARISTOTLE'S BOOK x 

knowledge, as in the healing art, and all others which 
involve careful practice and skill. 

Will not then our next business be to enquire from 
what sources, or how one may acquire this faculty 
of Legislation ; or shall we say, that, as in similar 
cases, Statesmen are the people to learn from, since 
tliis faculty was thought to be a part of the Political 
Science ? Must we not admit that the Political 
Science plainly does not stand on a footing similar to 
that of other sciences and faculties ? I mean that, 
while in all other cases those who impart the faculties 
and themselves exert them are identical (physicians 
and painters for instance), matters of Statesmanship 
the Sophists profess to teach, but not one of them 
practises it, that being left to those actually engaged 
in it : and these might really very well be thought 
to do it by some singular knack and by mere practice 
rather than by any intellectual process. For they 
neither write nor speak on these matters (though it 
might be more to their credit than composing speeches 
for the courts or the assembly), nor again have they 
made Statesmen of their own sons or their friends. 

One can hardly suppose but that they would have 
done so if they could, seeing that they could have 
bequeathed no more precious legacy to their com- 
munities, nor would they have preferred, for them- 
selves or their dearest friends, the possession of any 
faculty rather than this. 

Practice, however, seems to contribute no little to 
its acquisition ; merely breathing the atmosphere of 
politics would never have made Statesmen of them, 
and therefore we may conclude that they who would 
acquire a knowledge of Statesmanship must have in 
addition practice. 

But of the Sophists they who profess to teach it 
are plainly a long way off from doing so : in fact, they 
have no knowledge at all of its nature and objects ; 
if they had, they would never have put it on the same 
footing with Rhetoric or even on a lower ; neither 



CHAP, vin ETHICS 307 

would they have conceived it to be ' an easy matter 
to legislate by simply collecting such laws as are 
famous because of course one would select the best,' 
as though the selection were not a matter of skill, 
and the judging aright a very great matter, as in 
Music. For they alone, who have practical knowledge 
of a thing, can judge the performances rightly or 
understand with what means and in 'what way they 
are accomplished, and what harmonizes with what ; 
the unlearned must be content with being able to 
discover whether the result is good or bad, as in 
painting. 

Now laws may be called the performances or tan- 
gible results of Political Science ; how then can a 
man acquire from these the faculty of Legislation, or 
choose the best ? We do not see men made phy- 
sicians by compilations : and yet in these treatises 
men endeavour to give not only the cases but also 
how they may be cured, and the proper treatment 
in each case, dividing the various bodily habits. Well, 
these are thought to be useful to professional men, 
but to the unprofessional useless. In like mannner 
it may be that collections of laws and Constitutions 
would be exceedingly useful to such as are able to 
speculate on them, and judge what is well, and what 
ill, and what kind of things fit in with what others ; 
but they who without this qualification should go 
through such matters cannot have right judgment, 
unless they have it by instinct, though they may be- 
come more intelligent in such matters. 

Since then those who have preceded us have left 
uninvestigated the subject of Legislation, it will be 
better perhaps for us to investigate it ourselves, and, 
in fact, the whole subject of State-management, that 
thus what we may call Human Philosophy may be 
completed as far as in us lies 

First then, let us endeavour to get whatever frag- 
ments of good there may be in the statements of 
our predecessors ; next, from the Politics we have 



308 ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS BOOK x 

collected, ascertain what kind of things preserve or des- 
troy Communities, and what, particular Constitutions ; 
and the cause why some are well and others ill managed ; 
for after such enquiry, we shall be the better able to 
take a concentrated view as to what kind of Consti- 
tution is best, what kind of regulations are best for 
each, and what laws and customs. 

Let us therefore begin by saying 2 . 

2 This unfinished sentence is the introduction to the 
Politics, the comparative study of actual forms of govern- 
ment, promised in the preceding sentences. [Eo.] 



APPENDIX 
[Book vn, Chapters xii to xv] 

To consider the subject of Pleasure and Pain falls 
within the province of the Social-Science Philosopher, 
since he it is who has to fix the Master-End which 
is to guide us in denominating any object absolutely 
evil or good. 

But we may say more : an enquiry into their nature 
is absolutely necessary. First, because we maintained 
that Moral Virtue and Moral Vice are both concerned 
with Pains and Pleasures : next, because the greater 
part of mankind assert that Happiness must include 
Pleasures (which by the way accounts for the word 
they use, iMKa.pi.os; ^a.lpfi.v being the root of that word). 

Now some hold that no one Pleasure is good, either 
in itself or as a matter of result, because Good and 
Pleasure are not identical. Others that some Pleasures 
are good but the greater number bad. There is yet a 
third view : granting that every Pleasure is good still 
the Chief Good cannot possibly be Pleasure. 

In support of the first opinion (that Pleasure is 
utterly not-good) it is urged th.it 

1. Every Pleasure is a sensible process towards a 
complete state; but no such process is akin to the 
end to be attained : e.g. the process of building is not 
the completed house. 

2. The man of Perfected Self - Mastery avoids 
Pleasures. 

3. The man of Practical Wisdom aims at avoiding 
Pain, not at attaining Pleasure. 

4. Pleasures are an impediment to thought, and the 
more so the more keenly they are felt. An obvious 
instance will readily occur. 

5. Pleasure cannot be referred to any Art : and yet 
every good is the result of some Art. 

6. Cuildren and brutes pursue Pleasures. 

303 



310 APPENDIX 

In support of the second (that not all Pleasures 
are good), That there are some base and matter of 
reproach, and some even hurtful : because some 
things that are pleasant produce disease. 

In support of the third (that pleasure is not the 
Chief Good), That it is not an End but a process 
towards creating an End. 

This is, I think, a fair account of current views on 
the matter. 

But that the reasons alleged do not prove it either 
to be not-good or the Chief Good is plain from the 
following considerations. 

First. Good being either absolute or relative, of 
course the natures and states embodying it will be so 
too; therefore also the movements and the processes 
of creation. So, of those which are thought to be bad 
some will be bad absolutely, but relatively not bad, 
perhaps even choice-worthy; some not even choice- 
worthy relatively to any particular person, only at 
certain times or for a short time but not in themselves 
choice-worthy. Others again are not even pleasures 
at all though they produce that impression on the 
mind : all such I mean as imply pain and whose 
purpose is cure ; those of sick people for instance. 

Next, since Good may be either an active working 
or a faculty, those which tend to place us in our 
natural state are pleasant incidentally because of that 
tendency. But the active working is really in the 
desires excited in the remaining (sound) part of our 
state or nature ; for there are Pleasures which have 
no connexion with pain or desire the acts of con- 
templative intellect, for instance, in which case there 
is no deficiency in the nature or state of him who 
performs the act. 1 

A proof of this is that the same pleasant thing 
does not produce the sensation of Pleasure when the 
natural stale is being filled up or completed as when 



1 See Bk. x, where the perfect man is described. [ ED.]. 



APPENDIX 311 

it is already in its normal condition : in this latter 
case what give the sensation are things pleasant per se, 
in the former even those things which are contrary. 
I mean, you find people taking pleasure in sharp or 
bitter things none of which is naturally or in itself 
pleasant. Therefore the Pleasures arising from them 
are not really pleasures, because it is obvious that as 
is the classification of pleasant things such must be 
that of the Pleasures arising from them. 

Next, it does not follow that there must be some- 
thing else better than any given pleasure because (as 
some say) the End must be better than the process 
which creates it. For it is not true that all Pleasures 
are processes or even attended by any process, but 
(some are) active workings or even Ends : in fact 
they result not from our coming to be something but 
from our using our powers. Again, it is not true that 
the End is, in every case, distinct from the process; 
it is true only in the case of such processes as conduce 
to the perfecting of the natural state. 

For which reason it is wrong to say that Pleasure 
is 'a sensible process of production' (or 'felt transi- 
tion '). For ' process etc.' should be substituted 
'active working of the natural state,' for 'sensible/ 
' unimpeded '. The reason of its being thought to be 
a ' process etc.' is that it is good in the highest sense : 
people confusing 'active working' and 'process' 1 
whereas they really are distinct. 

Next, as to the argument that Pleasures are bad 
because some things which are pleasant are also 
hurtful to health, it is the same as saying that some 
healthful things are bad for ' business '. In this sense, 
of course, both may be said to be bad, but then this 
does not make them out to be bad in themselves ; 
philosophic study sometimes hurts a man's health. 
But what hinders Practical Wisdom or any state 

- Better, ' that the exercise of a power is a transition 
(or coming into being) '. [ED.] 



312 APPENDIX 

whatever is, not the Pleasure peculiar to, but some 
Pleasure foreign to it. The Pleasures arising from the 
exercise of the Intellect or from learning only increase 
our capacity to think. 

Next. 'No Pleasure is the work of any Art.' 
What else would you expect ? No activity is the 
work of any Art, but only the capacity. Still the 
perfumer's Art or the cook's is thought to belong 
to Pleasure. 

Next. ' The man of Perfected Self-Mastery avoids 
Pleasures'. 'The man of Practical Wisdom aims at 
escaping Pain rather than at attaining Pleasure.' 

' Children and brutes pursue Pleasures.' 

One answer will do for all. 

We have already said in what sense all Pleasures 
are good per se and in what sense not all are good: 
it is the latter class that brutes and children pursue, 
such as are accompanied by desire and pain, that is 
the bodily Pleasures (which answer to this description) 
and the excesses of them in short, those in respect 
of which the man utterly destitute of Self-Control is 
thus utterly destitute. And it is the absence of the 
pain arising from these Pleasures that the man of 
Practical Wisdom aims at It follows that these 
Pleasures are what the man of Perfected Self-Mastery 
avoids; for obviously ho has Pleasures peculiarly his 
own. 

Then again, it is allowed that Pain is an evil and 
a thing to be avoided partly as bad per se, partly 
as being a hindrance in some particular way. Now 
the contrary of that which is to be avoided, quA it is 
to be avoided (i.e. evil), is good. Pleasure then must 
be a good. 

The attempted answer of Speusippus, 'That Plea- 
sure may be opposed and yet not contrary to Pain, 
just as the greater portion of any magnitude is con- 
trary to the less but only opposed to the exact half.' 
wiH not hold: for he cannot say that Pleasuie is 
c:inericallv evil. 



APPENDIX 313 

Again. Granting that some Pleasures are low, 
there is no reason why some particular Pleasure may 
not be very good, just as some particular branch of 
Knowledge may be, although there are some which 
are low. 

Perhaps it even follows, since each ' faculty may 
have active workings unimpeded, whether the active 
workings of all be Happiness or that of some one of 
them, that this active working, if it be unimpeded, 
must be choice-worthy : now Pleasure is exactly 
this. So that the Chief Good may be Pleasure of 
some kind, though most Pleasures be (let us assume) 
low per se. 

And for this reason all men think the happy life 
is pleasant, and interweave Pleasure with Happiness. 
Reasonably enough : because Happiness is perfect, but 
no impeded activity is perfect; and therefore the 
happy man needs as an addition the goods of the body, 
and the goods external, and fortune, that in these points 
he may not be fettered. As for those who say that 
he who is being tortured on the wheel, or falls into 
great misfortunes is happy provided only he be good, 
they talk nonsense, whether they mean to do so or 
not. On the other hand, because fortune is needed as 
an addition, some hold good fortune to be identical 
with Happiness : which it is not, for even this in excess 
is a hindrance, and perhaps then has no right to be 
called good fortune, since it is good only in so far as 
it contributes to Happiness. 

The fact that all animals, brute and human alike, 
pursue Pleasure, is some presumption of its being in 
a sense a Chief Good : 

' There must be something in what most folks say ', 

only as one and the same nature or state neither is 
nor is thought to be the best, so neither do all pursue 
the same Pleasure; Pleasure nevertheless all do. Nav 
further, what tl.ey pursue is, peril >p ; , n-"< f what they 
think nor what they would say they pursue, but, 



314 APPENDIX 

really one and the same; for in all there is some 
instinct above themselves. But the bodily Pleasures 
have received the name exclusively, because theirs is 
the most frequent form and that which is universally 
partaken of; and so, because to many these alone 
are known, they believe them to be the only ones 
which exist. 

It is plain too that, unless Pleasure (i.e. unimpeded 
activity) be good, it will not be true that the happy 
man's life embodies Pleasure: for why will he want 
it on the supposition that it is not good and that he 
can live even with Pain ? Because, assuming that 
Pleasure is not good, then Pain is neither evil nor 
good ; so why should he avoid it ? 

Besides, the life of the good man is not more 
pleasurable than any other unless it be granted that 
his activities are so too. 

Some enquiry into the bodily Pleasures is also 
necessary for those who say that some Pleasures, to 
be sure, are highly choice-worthy (the good ones to 
wit), but not the bodily Pleasures; that is, those 
which are the object-matter of the man utterly 
destitute of Self-Control. 

If so, we ask, why are the contrary Pains bad ? 
They cannot be (on their assumption) because the 
contrary of bad is good. 

Are we to say that the necessary bodily Pleasures 
are good in the sense in which that which is not-bad 
is good? Or that they are good only up to a certain 
point ? Such states or movements as cannot have 
too much of the better cannot have too much of 
Pleasure, but those which can of the former can also 
of the latter. Now the bodily Pleasures do admit of 
excess : in fact the low bad man is such because he 
pursues the excess of them instead of those which 
are necessary (meat, drink, and the objects of other 
animal appetites do give pleasure to all, but not in 
right manner or degree to all). But his relation to 
Pain is exactly the contrary : it is not excessive Pain, 



APPENDIX 315 

but Pain at all, that be avoids, because only in the case 
of him who pursues excessive Pleasure is Pain contrary 
to excessive Pleasure. 

It is not enough, however, merely to state the 
truth ; we should also show how the false view arises, 
because this strengthens conviction. I mean, when 
we have given a probable reason why that impresses 
people as true which really is not true, it gives 
them a stronger conviction of the truth. And so 
we must now explain why the bodily Pleasures 
appear to people to be more choice-worthy than 
any others. 

The first obvious reason is, that bodily Pleasure 
drives out Pain ; and because Pain is felt in excess 
men pursue Pleasure in excess, i.e. generally bodily 
Pleasure, under the notion of its being a remedy 
for that Pain. These remedies, moreover, come to 
be violent ones; which is the very reason they are 
pursued, since they present a striking contrast to 
the Pain they neutralize. 

And, as has been said before, there are the two 
following reasons why bodily Pleasure is thought to 
be not-good. 

1. Some Pleasures of this class are evidence of a 
low nature, whether congenital as in brutes, or acquired 
by custom as in bad men. 

2. Others are in the nature of cures, cures that is 
of some deficiency ; now of course it is better to 
have [the healthy state] originally than to recuperate. 

(But some Pleasures result when natural states 
are being perfected: these therefore are good oniy 
as a matter of result.) 

Again, the very fact of their being violent causes 
them to be pursued by such as can relish no others : 
such men in fact create violent thirsts for themselves 
(if harmless ones then we find no fault, if harmful 
then it is bad) because they have no other things 
to take pleasure in, and the neutral state is dis- 
tasteful to some people constitutionally. For toil 



316 APPENDIX 

of some kind is inseparable from life, and physiologists 
testify, killing us that the acts of seeing or hearing 
are painful, only that we are used to the pain. 

Similarly in youth the constant growth produces a 
state much like that of vinous intoxication, and youth 
is pleasant. Again, men of the melancholic tempera- 
ment constantly need some remedial process (because 
the body, from its temperament, is constantly being 
worried), and they are in a chronic state of violent 
desire. But Pleasure drives out Pain; not only 
such Pleasure as is directly contrary to Pain but 
even any Pleasure provided it be strong : and this is 
how men come to be utterly destitute of Self-Mastery, 
i.e. low and bad. 

But those Pleasures which are unconnected with 
Pains do not admit of excess. Such are those which 
belong to objects which are pleasant naturally and not 
merely as a matter of result. By the latter class I 
mean such as are remedial, and the reason why these 
are thought to be pleasant is that the cure results 
from the action in some way of that part of the 
constitution which remains sound. By ' pleasant 
naturally ' I mean such as put into action a healthy 
bodv. 

The reason why no one and the same thing is 
invariably pleasant is that our nature is not simple, 
but complex, involving something different from 
itself (in virtue of which we are mortal). Suppose 
then that one part of this nature be doing some- 
thing, this something is, to the other part, unnatural : 
but, if there be an equilibrium of the two natures, 
then whatever is being done is indifferent. It is 
obvious that if there be any whose nature is simple 
and not complex, to such a being the same course of 
acting will always be the most pleasurable. 

For this reason it is that the Divinity feels Pleas- 
ure which is always one, i.e. simple : not motion 
merely but also rest, and perfect Pleasure resides 
rather in absence than in the presence of motion. 



APPENDIX 317 

The reason why the Poet's dictum ' change is of 
all things most pleasant ' is true, is ' a baseness in 
our blood ' ; for as the bad man is easily changeable, 
bad must be also the nature that craves change, 
i.e. it is neither simple nor good. 

We have now said our say about Self-Control 3 
and its opposite, and about Pleasure and Pain, 
what each is and how the one set is good, the other 
bad. We have yet to speak of Friendship. 

1 i.e. Continence and Incontinence. [Eo.] 



<* 



